Breast Cancer Tips and Tricks from Two Survivors… Navigating the Emotional Effects of Breast Cancer














Phyllis Mikolaitis & Peggie D. Sherry









Copyright © 2021 Phyllis Mikolaitis & Peggie D. Sherry
All Rights Reserved






Table of Contents

Dedications	i
Faces of Courage	iii
Bodies of Courage Cover Photos – Survivors as Art	iv
About the Authors	vi
About Faces of Courage	xi
Introduction	1
Section One: I’ve Been Diagnosed with Cancer, Now What?	4
Chapter 1: What to Do When You Hear the Words “You Have Cancer”	5
Chapter 2: I Don’t Have Time  for Cancer	11
Chapter 3: Get a Second Opinion	14
Chapter 4: Assembling Your Team  for Battle	19
Chapter 5: How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis with My Spouse/Partner?	25
Chapter 6: How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis with My Children?	28
Chapter 7: The Elephant in the Room	32
Chapter 8: Whisper No More. Learning to Say the “C-Word”	35
Chapter 9: The Cultural Impact on Screening and Treatment	38
Chapter 10: When Am I a Survivor?	42
Chapter 11: 50 Ways Friends and Family Can Help Cancer Patients	44
Chapter 12: Conversation Do’s and Don’ts for Caregivers and Friends	50
Section Two: Fighting the Battle and Moving Forward	54
Chapter 13 Navigating the Financial Challenges of Breast Cancer	55
Chapter 14: Getting Ready for a Mastectomy	62
Chapter 15: Facing the Mirror	68
Chapter 16: Understanding Chemotherapy and the Do’s and Don’ts	71
Chapter 17: But You’ve Got to Eat	82
Chapter 18: Don’t Forget to Laugh	87
Chapter 19: The Power of  Positive Thinking	90
Chapter 20: Learning to Ask for Help	97
Chapter 21: Take Baby Steps	100
Section Three: Surviving to Thriving	103
Chapter 22: “On a Bad Day, There’s Always Lipstick”	104
Chapter 23: It’s All About Your Hair	122
Chapter 24: Wig-Out	127
Chapter 25: Did Your Caregiver Turn into a Vulture?	130
Chapter 26: Complementary and Integrative Therapies	133
Chapter 27: Dealing with Long-Term or Chronic Effects of Breast Cancer	155
Chapter 28: Lymphedema Early Warnings and Management	185
Chapter 29: Patient’s Prescriptions for Their Doctor	191
Chapter 30: Left Out in the Cold	198
Chapter 31: Your Treatment is Over – Now What?	202
Chapter 32: The Worry Skirt and Managing Your Fears	206
Chapter 33: Thriving Through Sharing Your Story	213
Chapter 34: Create a Treasure Map to Your Future	217
Where to Find Information and Assistance	222
Sources and Further Reading	228




Dedications

Phyllis Mikolaitis
   I want to thank and honor my parents George and Gertrude Hettenbach, who raised my brother and me with a deep love for learning, gratitude for what life has given us, and dedication to giving back. I sincerely appreciate my mom urging me to write this book and share what I have learned with others who are facing life’s challenges.
   To my children Wendy Sloan, Linda Garufi, Christopher Shigas, and to my grandchildren Megan Endebrock, Christopher Sloan, and Haley, Jacob, Cameron, and Caroline Shigas. I am so blessed to have them in my life. They bring me great joy. 
   I humbly dedicate this book to the incredible people I have met and with whom I have shared cancer experiences. Thank you for sharing your stories and allowing me to include the knowledge we gained through the school of hard knocks. I sincerely hope it brings hope and help to the readers.
Peggie D. Sherry
   First, I want to thank my parents Cynthia and John Drolshagen, who instilled a sense of family, hard work, and a commitment to giving back.
   To Sue Drolshagen Fowler and Glenwood Sherry, who left us before their time. Bye-bye butterfly, see you later, alligator. To my children, J. Christopher, Isabella, and Gretchen Sherry – I love you more! To ‘The Sisters’ Mardie Drolshagen, Maryann DeCastro, Cyn Plunkett, and the men who love them, Lourenco De Castro and Charlie Plunket. No one makes me laugh as much as ‘The Sisters’.
   This book is sincerely and affectionately dedicated to all the amazing Warriors I’ve met and those I haven’t who are/have battled cancer; you are the Faces of Courage!
To All Cancer Survivors, I Wish You SISU
SISU (see-soo) Noun
   Sisu is a unique Finnish concept. It stands for the philosophy that what must be done will be done, regardless of what it takes. Sisu is a special strength and persistent determination and a resolve to continue and overcome in the moment of adversity… an almost magical quality, a combination of stamina, perseverance, courage, and determination held in reserve for hard times.


Faces of Courage

   On behalf of the cancer survivors and their families who have benefitted from the free services provided by Faces of Courage, we would like to humbly thank two individuals who have had the greatest impact on the success of this organization: Ms. Libbie F. Gerry, the Gerry-Corbett Foundation, and Mr. Skip Glass, TransWorld Diversified Services. You have been the silent partners who saw the need to help those in the battle for their lives, and we cannot thank you enough. 
   To our 1,600+ volunteers, some of who have been with us since the beginning, we are beyond grateful for your loving support. None of these programs could have occurred without your countless hours of hard work, dedication, and attention to detail. We love you and thank you from the bottom of our hearts.


Bodies of Courage Cover Photos – Survivors as Art

   Each day, thousands of women are diagnosed with breast cancer. To honor those survivors and promote hope to those suffering from the disease, visionary artist Lisa Scholder created beautiful works of art which comprise the Bodies of Courage Collection. All the models are actual breast cancer survivors who used their bodies as a canvas for Scholder’s art.
   Each model is beautifully painted with an uplifting design that sparks not only beauty but portrays the courage these women faced in their fight against breast cancer. It proves that you can survive breast cancer and demonstrates how beautiful one’s body truly is.
   Each model has an amazing story to tell. There are stories of shock, disbelief, fear, disfiguring surgeries, harsh medical treatments, and long recovery times. Their journeys have all taken their own paths, but the common thread is their overwhelming courage and resolve to beat Breast Cancer….some more than once.
   In 2010, Lisa Scholder approached Peggie Sherry, CEO of Faces of Courage Cancer Camps, about doing a collaborative art project with the Faces of Courage Adult Women survivors. Neither Lisa nor Peggie knew that this project would go on for 11 years and still continues today. Fifty-five women have been painted. 
   “These women endured so much, and the best part is their determination and attitude. They can tell their story with their body through this artwork and show how beautiful these women truly are. This is a little art project that grew wings and flew. Each model spends between 6-10 hours being painted and photographed. As a result of their experience, it is a day that transforms more than their bodies. Their courage shines through each photo,” says Peggie D. Sherry, two-time Breast Cancer Survivor.
   Jim Webb of The Webb Works captured on video the process and interviewed many of the models. You can see a seven-minute video on the making of the Bodies of Courage photos on YouTube: youtube.com/watch?v=Wgl0xi59164 
   You can find more about the cover Artist Lisa Scholder on her Facebook Page: facebook.com/bodypaintedcancersurvivors
   The model on the front cover is cancer survivor Coleen C. The model on the back cover is cancer survivor Gill G.


About the Authors

   The authors are dedicated to the Faces of Courage Foundation and its work. Therefore, all proceeds from the sale of the book are being donated to the organization. We are grateful for your purchase as it enables us to continue our work with cancer patients. 
Phyllis Mikolaitis
Board Member of Faces of Courage Foundation & President/Sales Training Solutions 
   Media, Pennsylvania, resident Phyllis Mikolaitis is a four-time cancer survivor. She is an eloquent, compassionate speaker who immediately impacts audiences. Her energy and authenticity move listeners as she shares the remarkable story of her battles with multiple types of cancer. Communicating in a conversational and upbeat style, she encourages patients to plan and take control of their life. The tools and guidance she provides help patients uncover the courage, clarity, and confidence to face the challenges of battling cancer. Phyllis offers an integrated approach to healing and growing your mind, body, and spirit.
   Since her first diagnosis, Phyllis has provided comfort, support, and information to others facing the terrifying diagnosis. She has spoken to groups such as the National Association of Professional Women and Gilda’s Club. In addition, Phyllis has used her experiences and business expertise to develop an integrated approach to healing the mind, body, and spirit. The stories she gathered and the life strategies she has created intend to shift your view of your situation. They provide hope and inspiration, not only for surviving but thriving in life after cancer.
   Phyllis is not only a motivational speaker for groups supporting those diagnosed, but she is also the Founder and President of Sales Training Solutions headquartered in Media, PA. Phyllis has over thirty-five years of global experience developing her skills in sales, leadership, and communications. She is Co-author of the book Corporate Event Project Management published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY. The book is courseware for several international universities, including George Washington University, where she was a consistent guest lecturer for twenty-one years.
   Before establishing her own business, Phyllis was employed by Xerox Corporation, where she received numerous awards, including two instances of the prestigious Xerox Vice President’s Award for Excellence. In addition, she has received the New Media Invision Gold Award for innovative multi-media training.
   Phyllis has been dedicated to community service and has received the Philadelphia Fire Marshall’s Association Honors for the Save-A-Life program she founded with her late brother, George Hettenbach, manager of patient safety at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. In addition, she is a board member of Faces of Courage and remains active with local community projects.
Peggie D. Sherry
CEO/Founder Faces of Courage Foundation
   Coming from Palm Beach, FL, Peggie D. Sherry has lived in the Tampa Bay area since 1975. Her first career was in the family business as a banker for eighteen years. After leaving banking, she became an Independent Television Producer/Editor for PBS, earning three coveted Telly Awards. Then in 1999, she began her work with cancer patients. Ms. Sherry founded the Faces of Courage Foundation in January 2004 with an inheritance left by her parents. 
   Ms. Sherry serves and has served (since 2005) on numerous committees and research grants at H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and the University of South Florida and has several published manuscripts and abstracts. Since 2019, Ms. Sherry has been a member of the NCI External Board of Directors at H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center. In addition, she has been a grant reviewer for the Department of Defense, Susan G. Komen, and Hillsborough Education Foundation.
   Ms. Sherry has been honored with many awards, most notably: Breast Cancer Wellness Magazine’s Advocate of the Year; Aetna Foundation’s Voices of Health Award; Royal Neighbors Insurance Company’s Nation of Neighbors Award; Tampa Bay Buccaneers Football Team’s Distinguished Breast Cancer Survivor; eBay’s Grand Prize Winner “Every Mom’s a Hero” International contest; NASA Honoree for Breast Cancer Survivors; Yoplait Yogurt National Champion;  American Red Cross’ Good Neighbor Award; WEDU’s (PBS TV) Speaking of Women’s Health Award; Florida State Daughters of the American Revolution FL State Community Service Award; and FOX News Hometown Hero, among others. 
   Community Service has always been a passion for Ms. Sherry. She is the Founder of the Gasparilla Krewe of Agustina de Aragon (founded in 1997), the Krewe of Agustina Scholarship Fund (1998), and KOA Full Heart Foundation (2020). A member of Daughters of the American Revolution since 1974, Ms. Sherry has served as an Officer and Chairman on the local, state, and national levels. She is also active in her Daughters of American Colonists chapter as a long-standing officer and chapter chairman. In addition, Ms. Sherry has served over eighteen years as a Rotary’s Camp FL Board Member, Hillsborough County Grants Collaborative Executive Board Member since 2008, and Beth Waters Friendship Foundation Board of Directors since 2006, along with other nonprofit board positions. 
   As a spokesperson, motivational speaker, author, and advocate, Ms. Sherry has appeared/quoted NBC Dateline, Boston Globe, USA Today, Washington Post, Miami Herald, PBS specials, Huffington Post, Heal Magazine, DuPont Registry Magazine, In the Field, Breast Cancer Wellness Magazine (cover photo/story), Healthy Cells Magazine (cover photo/story); along with over 100 local TV/Radio/Print media interviews.


About Faces of Courage

   Faces of Courage Foundation, Inc. is a Nationally recognized 501(c)(3) nonprofit cancer patient support organization dedicated to providing, free of charge, programs emphasizing practical education, life coping strategies, and improved self-esteem through non-threatening, engaging, and recreational outings and camps, including culturally relevant programs for minorities, which encourage a sense of “community” rather than isolation, with a primary goal of helping the cancer patient navigate their way through the treatment process and to thrive as a  survivor.
   Faces of Courage provides day outings, educational workshops, virtual programming, and medically supervised overnight camps for adults and children starting at two years of age with all types of cancers. 
   Faces of Courage is the first organization in the Nation to tailor a women’s weekend camp for minority cancer survivors and is considered a leader in minority outreach and education.
   Faces of Courage is based in Tampa, Florida, but it draws cancer survivors from all over the United States and neighboring countries.


Introduction 

   The only words more terrifying than “you have cancer” would be “your child has cancer.” Once you hear those words, your world forever changes. You will never be the person you were before your diagnosis. Unfortunately, no one is truly prepared for what comes next. There are no classes like they have for pregnancy, and your medical providers don’t have the time to walk you through the emotional side of cancer.
   Typically, doctors provide the diagnosis and recommend treatment but ignore or make light of the emotions you feel when you hear the diagnosis and experience the side effects of treatment. Unfortunately, this area has also been missed or glossed over by the media, books, magazines, and websites. Yet, the emotional side of cancer has a significant impact on your experience, mindset, and recovery. Inspired by our own emotional journey and lessons learned along the way, we share insights to help you avoid pitfalls and take steps to thrive after cancer.
   We are both survivors of multiple battles with cancer. Since 1999, we have worked with over 12,000 patients at various stages of their journey. Over the years, we found that breast cancer is not “one size fits all” but different for every patient. Therefore, our book is not a continuous narrative. Instead, it is structured in chapters so you can choose the topics that speak to you and read them when needed. It includes the issues most often discussed in our one-on-one interactions and at Faces of Courage cancer camps. We have written it in everyday language providing real-life examples from our stories and those of campers and other patients. It is intended to answer the questions you don’t know or are afraid to ask. 
   Our book also includes hints and tips for handling emotions, side effects, and everyday activities while in treatment, as well as the long-term impacts. Other survivors and we have found that the experience changes you forever. Yet, life after treatment remains unexplored. Using the final chapter on “treasure mapping” as a guide, you can create a plan for the next chapter in your life. It will help you uncover new opportunities and become your personal best. 
   We are not medical doctors and do not provide medical descriptions of the various surgeries or the over one hundred types of chemotherapy, as those are well-covered in other books and websites. Therefore, the appendix contains sources for further reading on those areas and locating assistance with finance and other subjects of interest. We hope our book will provide inspiration and make your journey smoother.
   To avoid redundancy, we have listed below some of the actions that will help you deal with the symptoms and long-term impacts. These actions are common to many of the effects and the guidelines for a healthy lifestyle and your overall well-being:
* Eat three healthy, well-balanced meals. Make sure you include plenty of fresh vegetables and at least four ounces of protein.
* Stay hydrated. Drink at least sixty-four ounces of water every day.
* Exercise, even it is only mild or moderate. For example, a nice walk outside will boost your spirits in addition to building healthy muscles and bones.
* Get at least eight hours of sleep every night. Take a nap if you are feeling tired.
* Avoid alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine. They can lead to other health problems as well as aggravate your symptoms.
* If you have questions or concerns, always call your doctor’s office.
  






Section One
I’ve Been Diagnosed with Cancer, Now What?


Chapter 1: What to Do When You Hear the Words “You Have Cancer”

   If you are like most people, your world is turned upside down when you are first diagnosed with cancer. It may take a few days to sink in, but when it does, you may feel depressed or hopeless. Take heart, as more and more people, even those with stage 4 cancer, are surviving. We have survived multiple battles with cancer. Our greatest hope is that this book will bring you comfort and the realization that you are not alone. You can take charge of the situation and take actions that have helped us and others win the war.
   Cry. It is OK just to let it out. Of course, this is a lot to process. Crying allows you to release the emotions you feel. People express their fears and anxiety in different ways. Cancer takes a toll both inwardly and outwardly. Putting on a brave face does not communicate how challenging cancer is. After you finish crying, do what our counselor told us to do, “When life gives you lemons, make lemonade.” It isn’t easy, but we have done it and feel better about it. 
   Now you ask yourself how I begin to make lemonade out of the lemons I have been handed. If you know someone who has experienced cancer and has a positive attitude, they can be a tremendous asset. Many times, friends or family members will suggest you speak with a cancer survivor they know. It never hurts to reach out. 
   One of the most remarkable yet sad realities of cancer is that sometimes the people you think will be there to support you disappear, and total strangers come to your aid.
   Next, you might feel angry. The diagnosis and the thought of losing your breast or both breasts are depressing. Moreover, your life will change, and your decisions will have lifelong implications. So, you need time to gather information and consider your options. You get opinions from your spouse or significant other, your children, siblings, and your best friend. Ultimately it is your decision, and you will live with the choices you make. 
   Don’t be afraid to get a second opinion. The second team may provide you with a completely different approach. In addition, the doctor and the associated institution may be involved with new treatments that you may want to consider.
   What are your options? They depend upon the type of cancer, the stage, the doctor, and the facilities you choose. The choices also include an emotional impact. First, of course, you want to save your life. But the treatment to reach that goal may involve losing one or both of your breasts. That loss can affect your feelings about your sexuality, femininity, self-confidence, and many other emotions. Other choices may involve a breast-conserving lumpectomy followed by radiation. Until diagnosis and treatment are discussed, many women don’t realize it may involve daily trips to a radiation facility for as long as four to six weeks. It also can cause burns on the entry and exit points of the radiation. Finally, there can be long-term impacts on the heart and cardiovascular system, primarily if the radiation is delivered to the left side of the body. The newer treatments are targeted, but there are still risks.
   Some choose chemotherapy either before or after a mastectomy or lumpectomy. Other treatments include Mammosite balloon brachytherapy. It is a breast-conserving treatment that employs inserting a device with a unique balloon into the surgical cavity to deliver radiation to the affected area. The advantage of this option is the ability to deliver fractionated radiotherapy (a non-uniform dose that stays within the normal tissue tolerance for the tissue surrounding the tumor) for five days compared to the weeks with traditional radiation therapy. In addition, the level of patient tolerance of this process is high. Technical reports indicate it has provided dramatic relief of severe symptoms.
   Facilities in over 30 major cities are now offering proton beam radiation therapy for breast cancer. Traditional radiation therapy delivers x-rays or a beam of photons to the malignant tumor and beyond. It can damage healthy cells in the area and cause significant side effects. The new therapy delivers a photon beam directly to the cancer cells so, damage to nearby healthy cells is less likely. Studies are limited as it is a new therapy. Some experts believe it is safer than traditional radiation therapy. Patients have been very positive about the treatment, but it is more expensive than conventional radiation therapy. A point to consider is that many insurance companies have not yet approved it for payment.
   If you choose to have a mastectomy or double mastectomy, you have another choice to make. You must also decide if you want reconstruction or you want to be a flattie. If you choose reconstruction, it can be done simultaneously with the mastectomy, or it can be done later. If you have cancer in only one breast, having reconstruction in that breast will not perfectly match the natural breast. If cancer later occurs in the opposite breast, the reconstruction will not be ideally matched to the first breast. We both opted to have a double mastectomy and reconstruction at the same time. The result is matching breasts.
   Finally, some women choose not to have reconstruction. They call themselves flatties. They do not want further surgery and are comfortable with a flat breast. Connections to their group and Facebook page are in the resource section. 
   You have a lot to consider. Therefore, you want to take the time to make your choices. So, don’t let anyone pressure you into a decision you don’t understand or feel comfortable with. Above all, you cannot be an ostrich and hide your head in the sand. You must make a decision. You probably have time to gather information, get your appointments made, and come to a conclusion that you can live with. 
   Get busy with checking the benefits included in your health insurance. Ensure your plan covers the doctors you select. Check the terms of the co-payments your insurance requires. Also, check which hospitals your plan covers. Some labs are not included in health benefit plans, so be sure to check that your doctor sends your samples to a lab that takes your insurance.
   We have had experiences in which procedures or doctors performing them were not covered by insurance. Ask before any procedures are done in the hospital if your insurance covers them. The hospital may be participating in your plan. But the x-ray, scan, blood work, anesthesiologist, etc., may not be covered, or the person performing the task may not participate in your plan. 
   Chemotherapy is an element in the treatment plan for many cancer patients. So, check your insurance company which forms of chemotherapy are covered. Do they cover chemotherapy pills, or do they only cover infusions? Ask if receiving chemotherapy in a doctor’s office or outpatient center is more expensive than receiving it in the hospital. Perhaps, your insurance only covers chemotherapy in a hospital. You may be required to pay a different co-pay, depending upon where you receive it.
   Make an appointment with your dentist. Chemotherapy directly affects the calcium in your body. Visit your dentist as they can help you prevent damage to your teeth. You don’t want any added skirmishes to fight. They only add stress. You want to keep your teeth and mouth healthy, so you do not have to pause or stop your chemotherapy.
   Explore treatments and complementary therapies. Ensure that you have explored a variety of options. You and your doctor must agree on your treatment plan. New therapies and approaches to cancer are frequently being announced. Be sure you and your team are aware of them and explore the options related to your cancer.
   Remove any drama or stressful situations from your life. Most importantly, surround yourself with positive, uplifting friends. Attitude is everything when it comes to fighting cancer. 
   Lesson: “Failure to plan is planning to fail.” It is crucial to have a plan and to follow your plan. You also need to be able to review your plan and make adjustments when necessary. If you have done your homework and noted your plan and findings in a journal, you will have less stress and a greater propensity to survive.

Chapter 2: I Don’t Have Time
 for Cancer
Peggie’s Story

   The beginning of my journey started with a regular annual female check-up and mammogram. There is nothing to worry about, just the annoying office visit. Frankly, I had put it off for the last three years because I had been too busy with a very demanding job. The funny thing about my work is that I put on day outings and overnight camps for women and children touched by cancer. At camp, the women would ask me, “When was the last time you had a mammogram?” 
   My answer was, “I just have not had time. Anyway, there is no breast cancer in my family. I’m in good shape. I gave birth at an early age, and I breastfed my children.” At my job, you get really close to the families. You can’t help it when you’re working with them during the worst days they will ever face. I would often come into the office to find a note on my desk that said something like this, “Miss Peggie, please call Sara. She is going to kill her husband and wants you to come and bury the body.” Well, that is another story altogether. The point is, after working with cancer survivors for years, I know cancer pretty well.
   Let me get back to the day of my office visit. Before I left, the doctor who reads the mammograms came into the room. She said that she wanted me to go to the hospital to get a diagnostic mammogram. It is a more specialized mammogram. Two days later, I was at the hospital again. I was thinking, “I do not have time for this. I have already wasted enough time this week on medical exams. I need to get back to the office.” Bottom line… I DO NOT HAVE TIME FOR CANCER. Well, guess what? I had cancer, which was a type of breast cancer that would not have produced a lump.
   I was like so many other women. We put off getting a mammogram that can save our life. Why do we do it? There are a variety of reasons. In my case, I didn’t think I had the time. Some women put it off because they have heard the mammogram is painful. Others are afraid of receiving a diagnosis of cancer. 
   Lesson 1: You and your life are important. You need to put yourself first and make time for a mammogram. Yes, there is some discomfort with a mammogram, but it is a small sacrifice to save your life. Finally, don’t avoid the diagnosis. The earlier the cancer is diagnosed, the greater your opportunity for survival and less invasive treatments. 
   Here are a few facts to consider. In the year of this writing, the National Cancer Society predicts over 280,000 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer. Over 40,000 women die from breast cancer every year. Many of these women die unnecessarily. 
   Lesson 2: Early detection is your best opportunity for better outcomes. Today, most women who get their mammograms and get diagnosed early survive. An easy way to remember to make your mammogram appointment is to mark it on your calendar for your birthday. You cannot give yourself a better gift. So, the bottom line is GET YOUR MAMMOGRAM; IT CAN SAVE YOUR LIFE.


Chapter 3: Get a Second Opinion
Phyllis’ Story

   The C-word! I hate it! I’ve heard it four times in my life, and I never want to hear it again.
   I remember it so clearly. The first time I heard that word applied to me, I was just 44 years old, living in a suburb of Atlanta. I had an excellent management job with Xerox. My second husband and I had been married for just four years. I had three children, one recently married, one in college, and one in high school. While visiting my mom in Pennsylvania, I had my gynecology checkup and mammogram with the doctor that delivered my daughters. Since my mammogram showed an area that demanded further examination, a surgeon performed a biopsy the following week. Now, I was waiting for the results in the cold examination room, wearing one of those gowns that don’t cover everything.
   I didn’t suspect a problem; after all, the nurse didn’t invite my husband to join us. So, I thought it’s probably nothing or just a cyst, remove it, and I am done with it.
   Swish, the door opens, and the doctor enters, looking at my chart as he walks. He was a short chubby man in his early 60’s with a serious look. He peered over his little metal-rimed reading glasses perched on the middle of his nose. Finally, he looked at me with a serious yet matter-of-fact attitude and said, “Your biopsy report shows cancer; when do you want to schedule cutting them off?” It was a lot to comprehend, especially when my husband was still sitting in the waiting room. 
   I was stunned by his coldness. He didn’t appear to give one thought to how I felt or that perhaps my husband should join us. It took me a moment to gather my thoughts. How would I tell my husband? He had lost his mom to abdominal cancer when he was only seven years old, and then in his first marriage, he lost his three-year-old son to the same type of cancer. I wondered how Steve would handle this news. How would my mom deal with it? She was a recent widow. And my daughters, would they be afraid they would lose me who, as a single mom, had always been there for them? Would they fear they would inherit the gene? 
   I breathed deeply, and the person who had been a single mom for ten years and an in-control corporate manager took over my mind and body. As an always prepared person, I had had lunch with my friend Mary Ellen several days before the biopsy. She was a breast cancer survivor and had reconstructive surgery. At the time, there was a lot of controversy about reconstruction and breast implants. Also, there were still many HIV and AIDS-related cases associated with blood transfusions.
   In my role at Xerox, I spoke to senior executives and customers. So, my inner confidence about my appearance was important to me. I wanted reconstruction. My first step was to ask about the level of cancer. Fortunately, the stage was low and, it was not invasive. The next question for the doctor was if he coordinated with a plastic surgeon, as I had learned from Mary Ellen, there must be enough skin left to construct new breasts.
   With that question, the doctor became even colder and looked down his nose as he said, “Be very grateful young lady, that I will save your life. Don’t even think about reconstruction at this point. If you don’t get it, so what! You’ll live.” 
   My thoughts turned inward. I thought, “I am not just a body to be cut and stitched. I am a spirit that lives in this body.” His recommendation just didn’t feel right.
   So, I said, “Before I make any decisions, I want a second opinion!” 
   The doctor got red in the face and yelled at me, “You are very foolish. This is my professional opinion of your medical condition!” He proceeded to write on my chart in red ink. He noted that the staff should not treat me even if an emergency occurred after surgery elsewhere. Finally, he stated that I was a non-compliant patient because I did not follow his recommendation. 
   I was not deterred. I said, “I’d like my records, please.” 
   My strategy was to get a second opinion based on information from my Ob/Gyn in Pennsylvania. My backup plan was to seek out Mary Ellen’s doctors in Atlanta. While waiting for my records, I phoned my gynecologist. He was so different and so kind. He told me about a new process in Washington D.C. where cancer and reconstructive surgery are performed in one operation.
   My husband and I drove to Washington DC, where I met with the oncology and plastic surgeons. The oncology surgeon wanted to validate the diagnosis as the surgery, including mastectomy and reconstruction, was a major decision. The results of an additional test and a tissue sample were positive for non-invasive cancer. Both doctors agreed on a mastectomy rather than a lumpectomy or chemotherapy. 
   I decided these were the right doctors for my team and the right plan for me. My decision may not be the right one for you. Everyone must make the decision they feel is best for them. 
   Lesson: Get a second opinion. Even if you choose to go with your original doctor, a second opinion will confirm your diagnosis. It will also help you decide and have confidence in the best course of action for you. Treatment for breast cancer has evolved over the years, and there are many different treatment plans. You want to ensure your team is using the latest information and technology. Today’s technologies are less disfiguring. Also, many newer treatments are based on genetics. Again, you want to be sure the plan and the doctors are the right ones for you.


Chapter 4: Assembling Your Team
 for Battle

   You cannot imagine how much you don’t know about the cancer world until you visit it. Your journey starts with three of the worst words you can ever hear “You have cancer.”  Many people’s first reaction is, “Am I going to die?” It’s not unusual to go blank and not remember much after hearing those words. That is why we suggest you bring along a second set of ears. Bring your significant other, a family member, or your best friend to your appointments. You want notes on what kind of cancer you are facing and what stage it is. You also want to note any recommendations and contacts. Your “other set of ears” may also be prompted to ask some questions you would have asked were you not so stunned by the diagnosis.
   So, where do you start? What do you do?
   You are going into battle, and you need skilled, experienced people on your team. You want to choose the best people within your network. Why is this important? It’s because providers may bill separately from the facility and may not be in your network. Choosing the right people who are also in your network is critical to keeping your costs under control. Make sure you read our section on finance before scheduling any appointments.
   Who will be on your team, and how do you choose the right people? The same people won’t be on your team for the whole journey. Instead, some team members will be on the team only while they perform a specific task. Other team members will be with you throughout your journey. 
   Make sure that you select the best for you when choosing a surgeon, radiologist, hospital, oncologist, etc. Do they explain things in a way that you understand them? Do they treat you like an individual, not the breast cancer in room 3? Do you feel in your mind and your gut that they want to be fighting on your side? Will they go to the wall for you? If not, ‘fire them’ and look for someone that you can trust with your life. Yes, you can fire them. You pay them, it is your life, and ultimately you are in charge.
   Only when you know that you have put together the best team you can find will you have the confidence to fight the battle of your life.
   To choose the right team, you need to do some serious information gathering. Also, you need to take charge. Although your surgeon or medical oncologist may become your medical team leader, you must still be in control. It is your health, your body, and your life at stake. Don’t take just the recommendation from a friend or neighbor. Research and make your own decision. Depending upon your location, you will need to decide if you are going to a facility that only focuses on cancer, a cancer center within a major medical center/hospital, or a general hospital in your area. You may have all your treatments at one location. On the other hand, you may have your surgery at the primary location and other therapies at local facilities. Your location, finances, and ability to travel may play a part in your decision.
   The cancer centers and many medical centers have teams of oncology (cancer) surgeons, plastic surgeons, anesthesiologists, radiologists, lab technicians, and patient navigators. This is the best case as they will schedule and coordinate treatments and medication. The team meets and decides on the plan and discusses results and modifications to their strategy if necessary. In addition, many of these places have research teams and are in contact with groups in other facilities, such as drug companies. This connection allows them to consider their patients as possible candidates for clinical trials. Doctors also benefit from this team approach. Medical practitioners in training can participate or observe the process and gain years of insight in a short time. This helps future patients.
   Not everyone lives near a major medical facility or a cancer center. In addition, not everyone has the money to travel to one of these facilities, but that doesn’t mean you can’t get quality care. Do your research. Many rural hospitals have agreements with cancer centers and major medical centers to share information and conduct virtual consultations or team meetings. Suppose your facility doesn’t have a team approach. In that case, it means you will have to be even more watchful to make sure your treatments are scheduled in the proper order and not overlapping. You will also have to make sure every provider is aware of your treatments and your medications. In addition, you need to check with your insurance company. The coverage may differ if your chemotherapy is administered in a doctor’s office or outpatient facility rather than a hospital.
   Don’t let anyone force you to do anything until you fully understand what they are talking about and what will happen to you. If you don’t understand, ask more questions. Keep asking questions until you understand everything being discussed. You may ask the nurse for answers. They have more time and are comfortable answering questions in lay terms rather than medical terminology. Sometimes even the smartest women need a second set of ears to listen to the difficult news. As we suggested, bring someone with you who can sit in on the office visits (no drama queens allowed). Take notes, get the correct spelling of the type of breast cancer you have, and research it. Make sure that you are reading the information in books and on legitimate websites. There are no quick or magical cures for cancer. It would be nice but let’s get real here. Cancer is real, cancer is nasty, cancer is frightening, but cancer can be conquered.
   Some women choose to get a second opinion to feel comfortable with their team and its plan. Some women get a second opinion to confirm and help them accept the truth of the first diagnosis. Requesting a second opinion should not insult your first doctor or team. Medical providers recommend not discussing the plan of the first medical team until the second team presents their plan. It will allow you to have an open mind and get a clear picture of each strategy and its associated therapies. Also, don’t allow anyone to rush you. Selecting a team is a critical part of your battle plan. 
   We also recommend not allowing your financial situation to be the only factor you consider while determining your team and its plan. Cancer centers and major hospitals/medical centers have financial consultants and social workers to help you make financial arrangements or connect with charities and other support organizations. You may be surprised at the number of resources available if you make your needs known.
   Lesson: Take your time to gather information and select a team that is right for you. Get a second opinion or even a third if you are uncomfortable with the team or the plan. Take charge and remember, it is your health and your life at stake.

Questions to Ask Your Doctor
Q1. What kind of breast cancer do I have?
Q2. What stage is my cancer?
Q3. What is the hormone receptor status? This question is essential for determining treatment options. 
Q4. Will you call me, or shall I call you for my test/scan results? (Your portal is not updated with current scan results until your doctor reviews them; this could be days or weeks after the doctor’s office receives the results.)
Q5. Will you test for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes? (I am concerned about the likelihood of related cancers and the hereditary impact on my family)
Q6. Has cancer spread to my lymph nodes or other organs? Are there any further tests that you will order to find out if cancer has spread?
Q7. Do you recommend a lumpectomy or a mastectomy? Why do you make that recommendation?
Q8. Which course of treatment is best for me?
Q9. When and where do you recommend I begin treatment?
Q10. How long will it take me to recover from surgery and other treatments?
Q11.What are my chances for long-term survival?
Q12. If you do not have insurance or are concerned about costs, ask if your doctor has a recommendation for help.

Chapter 5: How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis with My Spouse/Partner?

   Open and honest communication is critical to success in any relationship. But it is even more essential when you have breast cancer. There will be practical and emotional concerns associated with every step in your journey. In addition, your husband or partner will experience a different but significant impact when you are diagnosed with breast cancer.
   Let’s start with the emotional concerns. Your significant other will worry that they may lose you. They may worry about your pain, suffering, and well-being. They will also be concerned about their ability to take over or arrange for everything you do every day. In many cases, the official confirmation of your diagnosis is no surprise. Spouses or partners frequently accompany their spouses to the doctor’s visit for the biopsy results. They should be involved in as many visits as possible to act as a second pair of eyes and ears and clearly understand your status and treatment plan. Most spouses/partners want to be supportive when possible. But many of us face that news alone.
   To either tell your spouse/partner about your diagnosis or review the visit’s news, set aside some private, quiet time. It is best to have a conversation when your children are not around and there are no distractions. We also recommend you allow enough time for discussion, questions, and processing what you learned and its impacts on both of you and your relationship. We’ve learned from the men in our families that some men want to discuss things and feel they need to take charge or fix it. Other men want solitude to process the information. Acknowledge that you both have different processing and coping styles. Know your partner/spouse and allow time to process the news in their way.
   As you move through your cancer journey, your needs change. Don’t be afraid to ask your significant other for what you need. Your partner/spouse may not know what you need or want. You may ask them to respond to phone calls from friends and family. Or you may be feeling tired and need help or someone to take over tasks like meal preparation, cleaning, or laundry. Please keep attuned to their level of stress and fatigue. There may be times that they need a break. Perhaps you can have a family member or a friend take over your spouse/partner’s responsibilities for a short time. A break can refresh them and help with coping with the next step in your treatment. They may enjoy a day out to a ball game or a visit to the local gym to relax and restore their mind and body.
   Not only is communication important, but also intimacy and a sexual relationship. Our research and conversations with other survivors showed that those experiencing the side effects of chemo and radiation therapies had more concerns about their sexual relationship. It is challenging to feel and express sexuality when you are worried about losing your hair and suffering nausea and diarrhea. In addition, depending upon your age or treatment, you may experience post-menopausal symptoms, which can impact your sex drive. We suggest that you contact a therapist or sociologist who specializes in sexual relationships. They can arrange visits for you and your spouse/partner individually or jointly. Their advice will guide you through conversations and healing.
   Continue to schedule one-on-one time with your spouse or significant other when you feel physically and emotionally up to it. The time you spend alone together is precious and so beneficial to maintaining a good relationship. You can express what you are feeling, answer each other’s questions, and understand your cancer situation. It will also give you time to talk about other things that help you feel “normal.” 
   Lesson: Open communication is critical when you have cancer. Communicating openly and consistently with your spouse/partner helps you maintain your relationship and strengthens it by allowing both of you to face your cancer as a team. Also, don’t forget to get help from other family members and friends, so your partner doesn’t get exhausted.

Chapter 6: How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis with My Children?

   At first, you and your partner or other significant family members will be processing the news of your diagnosis. Even if you are not openly talking about it, your children can feel the fear, tension, and upset in the household. You may have some fear or anxiety about telling your children what is happening. You may worry that you don’t know at this point what will happen, and you may fear that they will ask questions that you can’t or don’t know how to answer.
   Honesty creates a sense of safety and security, so make a plan for your parent-child conversation that begins with honesty. It is also critical to plan ahead so you can be calm during the conversation. If both parents work as a team, the discussion will be less stressful. After the conversation, you and your spouse/partner can compare impressions and perceptions. Finally, you want to create a comfortable environment. So, talk to each child individually. If they feel safe and comfortable, they will feel free to ask questions and express their thoughts and feelings. 
   Depending upon their age, children will feel a variety of emotions. For example, they may feel insecure, scared, or angry. They may also worry about who will take care of them. 
   Suppose your children are young like Phyllis’ were when she had her hysterectomy at 30 years old. In that case, you need to keep the conversation simple and in the language they can understand. For example, she told them that she had something growing inside her body that was making her sick. So, the doctor was going to take it out. When she came home from the hospital, she would be better but very tired. So, her cousin Chrissy would come to stay for a while to help. You can find books, such as The Kids Guide to Mommy’s Breast Cancer and Mommy Has a Boo Boo in her Boob, to help you explain to your children what is happening.
   If your children are in elementary school, they may study the human body. They may also have heard some of the commercials on TV for breast cancer drugs or promotions for breast cancer fundraising. So, you can be a little more specific with them. It is possible you may need to do more preparation for answering their questions. Books for this age group include My Mommy Has Breast Cancer, But She’s OK, In My Mommy’s Garden, and Butterfly Kisses and Wishes on Wings.
   Teenagers 13 to 17 probably know more about breast cancer. They may have a friend whose mom had breast cancer; they may also have heard of someone who has died of breast cancer. This group will have more specific questions. They may worry that their world is spinning out of control. Some teens will express concern that they will get breast cancer when they are older. Teens may also feel that their sense of independence has been impacted as now you need some help around the house or someone to run errands for you. So, keep the conversation going throughout your journey and work to make their life as normal as possible. Some common reactions reported by our campers were that teens are embarrassed, feel a sense of shame, or must be responsible for you. It eases their fears if you assure them that you will look as normal as possible when you go out. For example, if you lose your hair, you will wear an attractive hat, head covering, or a wig. In addition, assure them you will have help from friends and family. Ask for their support and assistance but reassure them that they are not responsible for you.
   The books mentioned for educating your children about breast cancer are available from several organizations or online booksellers, like eBay. You can also find them in a public library. Some are available in both English and Spanish.
   Children of any age can resent that the cancer patient gets gifts, flowers, visits, stuffed animals, and all the attention. Some children feel angry and may even act out because family plans need to be made around your medical appointments. Remember that it is tiresome for children to spend unending hours, days, and weeks sitting around in hospitals, waiting rooms, or shuttled between relatives while they wait for you to return home.
   How can you help your children cope?
* Plan a day to take the child/children on a play date, to a movie, or out shopping.
* Offer to take them to after-school activities.
* When schedules conflict or you are not feeling up to it, have a family member or friend take them to activities with other children.
* Bring the children gifts that are meaningful for them.
* Make or ask a volunteer to bring the child’s favorite meal. Not just another tuna casserole or lasagna.
* Check-in to see how they are feeling and if they have questions.
* Notify your children’s schools about the situation so they understand any changes in behavior or grades.
* Above all, ask them about their interests, hopes, and dreams. Keep a positive outlook with the children.
   Lesson: Knowing that the entire family is touched by cancer is the first step to offering meaningful help. Each stage of your cancer journey brings different situations, feelings, and emotions. So, keep the conversations going, open and honest. It will help you all make the journey successfully.

Chapter 7: The Elephant in the Room
Peggie’s Stories

   It is surprising how some people react when they hear about cancer; some are so frightened that they cannot even say the word. The word conjures up visions of immediate death and funerals. Some believe that by just saying the word “cancer,” they give it power, or something terrible will happen. We are no longer living in the 1700s or 1800s today, cancer is treatable, and we CAN talk about it. More women are surviving breast cancer today than in previous years. As of writing this book, multiple breast cancer research and treatment organizations state that the survival rate for women with non-metastatic breast cancer is 90%. The 90% is on par with the average population. This is very encouraging news for those diagnosed with breast cancer in this day and age. 
   Many cultures believe that the mere mention of the word cancer means you own cancer. One survivor shared that she often talked with her sister about her diagnosis. She remarked that she was upset that her sister called it the ‘C’ word and would not say the word cancer. She ended up calling it her toxic tit. From then on, that is how she referred to her cancer.
   Sometimes facing situations head-on and honestly is the best way to deal with cancer. For example, when my first mammogram came back, my doctor thought something might be wrong. So, I would try to talk with my husband, Glen, about the possibility of a positive diagnosis, and ever the optimist, he would say, “Don’t worry about it. You don’t have cancer.” Then he would go on to list all the reasons why not, such as there is no breast cancer in your family; you had suspicious mammograms before that were OK; you gave birth at an early age; you breastfed your children; you are not overweight… yada, yada, yada.
   When the subsequent mammograms came back, and my doctor was still concerned, I made an appointment to see a surgeon. On the way to the surgeon’s office, it was with great trepidation that I opened the envelope I was carrying from the hospital. Yes, I did read the radiologist’s report. Now I saw the words in black and white “Diagnosis: Possible Breast Cancer.” OK, I realize it says possible. My surgeon suggested a lumpectomy.
   That night, Glen still did not want to talk about it. He was doing everything in the world for me but talking about IT. Then, after the lumpectomy, I had to go out of town for work, and my boss asked, ‘How is your husband handling it?” 
   I said, “He isn’t.” 
   When I called Glen that evening, I told him that my boss asked about how he was handling my cancer diagnosis, and I told him my response.
   When I arrived back home, I was amazed to find everything had changed. Glen told me, “You were right.” Those are my favorite words after “Yes, Dear.” He said he just didn’t want to believe that I could have cancer. Now he found himself accepting the fact and began learning all that he could about the disease. Then we started talking about it, what we needed to know, and what we should do next.
   From that day forward, there was no longer the elephant in the room.
   Lesson: There are two critical points in Peggie’s story. First, it takes time to process and accept that a loved one or friend has cancer. It varies from person to person. Give them time. Second, acknowledging the elephant in the room enables you and your personal support team to move forward and work together.


Chapter 8: Whisper No More. Learning to Say the “C-Word”

   It is surprising how many people, when they know we are cancer survivors, come up and whisper something like, “I’ve had breast cancer.” We usually turn to them and ask, “What?” and they whisper again. “I’ve had breast cancer.” Our response is always, “Why are you whispering?” Their answer usually is, “Only my husband knows.” This totally blows our minds. Why would you hide an illness that you did nothing to get? Would you hide a root canal? Or a broken arm? Why would you hide cancer?
   A nurse told us about her neighbor, a woman of color. This woman is fighting advanced cancer with a powerful chemo treatment program. Unfortunately, she is hiding her illness from her son, neighbors, and even her pastor. Each Sunday, she puts on a wig and heads to church. She tells her fellow parishioners she has been under the weather for the past month with the flu. Can you imagine how alone and frightened this woman must be feeling? She may think that she is sparing her children and friends the sadness of seeing her battle cancer, but she doesn’t understand that people want to help and that she needs their help. Did she stop to think that she could put her loved ones at risk by keeping it a secret? Family members need to be aware of the family’s medical background. If you don’t know that your mother, grandmother, or aunt has had breast cancer, you will not realize that you are at higher risk. The word “cancer” is this huge dragon that people tiptoe past in the dark, whispering, so they won’t wake it.
   Many minority cultures are reluctant to talk about disease and use phrases like, “My Mom took ill and died. We never knew what the actual cause of death was.” It is vital that you know your family’s medical history.
   I mean, what the… How can people have this reaction to the diagnosis? Today, commercials for cancer treatment are on TV, communities and the media celebrate Breast Cancer Awareness month in October. There is no shame in being diagnosed with cancer. There is no Karma involved. You did not catch it from someone. No one wished it on you. You are not a bad person, and God is not punishing you. It is just that you have cells in your body that are going haywire because they have a broken ‘on’ switch, which allows the unhealthy cells to replicate at a rapid speed and crowd out healthy cells. Having cancer does not mean you are going to die. We have wonderful surgeons, radiologists, and oncologists that can help you fight this disease.
   Why do people like those in these examples keep their diagnosis a secret? Some people don’t want to burden or alarm their friends and family, while others don’t want people to pity them or treat them differently. Also, some patients don’t want the illness to define them. They still want to be Mary, or Alice, or Susan, not the cancer patient.
   Lesson: Fighting cancer is a team effort. Don’t try to go it alone. You are not alone; there are many of us willing and able to share our stories. All you have to do is speak up. You can say the word cancer. It is just a word… it is only the name of a disease. A disease that you can fight, a battle you can win.


Chapter 9: The Cultural Impact on Screening and Treatment

   Breast cancer will affect one in eight women during her lifetime. When detected early, breast cancer can be treated and cured. Today, when the survival rate is over 90 percent for non-metastatic breast cancer, why is there a disproportionately high death rate in minority women? First and foremost, minority women often don’t get regular checkups. It’s something they ignore for many reasons. For example, they may not have insurance, or they may be unable to make a copayment. In addition, many women of all ethnicities live in poverty. They need help to get financial assistance or find a free service. Most communities have some type of free mammogram program. You need to check with your local Health Department or contact the Susan G. Komen Foundation for a location near you.
   But poverty isn’t the only reason women in some cultures don’t seek screening or treatment. The National Institutes of Health conducted a study to determine how cultural beliefs impacted preventive services and treatment. The number one reason was a belief that “faith can protect you from breast cancer.” Some other reasons were, “If a lump is touched or pressed often, it will turn into cancer,” “If breast cancer is cut open in surgery, it will grow faster.” Regrettably, some women said, “It doesn’t matter if you get treated for breast cancer, because if you get it, it will kill you sooner or later.” In addition, almost 20% of the women surveyed said, “You only need to get a mammogram once you find a problem in your breast.”
   A study found that black women avoid getting mammograms for several reasons. First, they feel disrespected and feel they won’t get the information they need at a facility. Second, they also fear a wrong diagnosis or, worse yet, an unnecessary mastectomy. As a result, black women have a 31% breast cancer mortality rate – the highest of any US ethnic group.
   Other cultures also delay or skip preventative exams and treatment. For example, Native Americans and Alaska Natives have a lower instance of breast cancer than white women but a higher death rate.
   Why is this so? It’s because many of these women live on a reservation or in a rural area. Their distance from services and transportation issues are a factor. In addition, they lack knowledge about screening and treatment. A study by the National Institutes of Health found women in this group suffer from fear and embarrassment. They also found their cultural life has an impact on this statistic. For example, once they receive a cancer diagnosis, women in this group are likely to seek the counsel of a tribal healer and get their blessing before starting treatment.
   The reasons for skipping mammograms and delaying or avoiding treatment other than financial vary with cultures. Science Direct, a reliable source of research documents, confirms what Phyllis noticed while working in China. When a family member is sick, they don’t go to a nursing home or receive hospice care. Instead, family members, particularly the women, care for them. Therefore, the women feel they don’t want to burden their families and avoid screening and treatment.
   Muslim women must adhere to their religious requirements for maximum modesty. Therefore, no male other than their husband can see their naked body. Sadly, this restriction is one of the reasons causing women to skip exams and mammograms. As a result, their cancer is found in later stages. To address this issue, hospitals are making changes to their women’s health departments. For example, a hospital in California now has an imaging department primarily made up of women. In addition, some other hospitals are making it known that there are female surgeons on the staff. The intent is to encourage Muslim women to come for examination and treatment. The other reason they delay or skip prevention and treatment is the belief that fasting and prayer promote health and prevent or cure illness. To raise awareness and encourage seeking care, organizations are putting education in the context of their faith. They tell the women that Allah loans you a body, and you have an obligation to him to take care of yourself. 
   We can’t cover all of the cultural issues here. So instead, this chapter gives you a brief view of the issues causing women to skip screening and delay or ignore the need for treatment.
   Hospitals are making changes to help bring prevention and treatment to non-white cultures. For example, the Betty Ford Foundation has a mobile mammogram unit. It travels throughout the area, offering mammograms to women, including those uninsured and underinsured. In addition, there are mobile units across the country affiliated with hospitals, charities, and other organizations. 
   Unfortunately, there isn’t a central website for locating a mobile mammogram unit in your area. Yet, they are easy to find; you can go online and search for “mobile mammogram units in my area.” Then your browser will display the locations near you.
   In addition, we found hospitals are hiring multi-lingual patient navigators. Now they can communicate with more patients and assist them in getting financial aid or transportation to services they need.
   Lesson: Hospitals, government agencies, and many charities are working to educate women and provide services for the uninsured and underinsured. Education is critical to addressing beliefs and cultural issues so more women of every culture will survive.

Chapter 10: When Am I a Survivor?

   Most people will tell you that as soon as you hear the words “you have cancer,” you are a cancer survivor at that moment. Some even consider the entire family unit as survivors. Peggie’s thought on the matter is that you are a STRIVER for the first two years.
   You are striving to grasp the idea that you are now fighting for your life.
   You are striving to put together your medical team of an oncologist, surgeon, radiologist, anesthesiologist, hospital, etc.
   You are striving to be the best patient you can be by following your doctor’s advice and adhering to the protocol.
   You are striving to understand why your insurance company makes the decisions they make.
   You are striving to reassure your family that you are going to be OK.
   You are striving to convince yourself that you are going to be OK. Crying in the shower is a great way of hiding your fear from your family members.
   Once you have fought through 2 years, you have survived and can become a full-fledged survivor. 
   Survivors have a game plan and are looking towards the end goal.
   Survivors are often approached by friends, coworkers, and friends of friends looking for advice on dealing with cancer.
   Survivors often rethink the amount of stress they will allow in their lives.
   Survivors often rethink everything from friends, marriage, and careers.
   After five years, a Survivor should be on the path to becoming a Thriver.
   A Thriver is one who has been there, done that, and come out on the other side with a new lease on life.
   Lesson: You are a survivor right from the beginning of your diagnosis. Then with each step in your treatment, you are moving from survivor to thriver. 


Chapter 11: 50 Ways Friends and Family Can Help Cancer Patients

   When a person first gets a cancer diagnosis, they’re often so overwhelmed they have no idea how to ask for help or what to ask for—but they sure need it. If you have a friend or family member with cancer, you want to help. So, don’t make the mistake of making a vague, questionably sincere offer like “well, call me when you need me!” (They won’t).
   Instead, make your friend or family member’s life easier by anticipating their needs and giving physical, much-needed support. 
   Below is a collection of favors people did for us and suggestions from campers and cancer websites:
1. If you’re a close friend or family member to the cancer patient, offer to be a “point person” where you screen and accept/decline others’ visits and help offers. Right after a diagnosis, many want to help and visit and call. But the person with cancer is probably extremely overwhelmed at this time and may prefer some rest and space.
2. Offer to be the “communication person” who updates others about your friend’s state of health because it can get difficult for the patient to share the details repeatedly. In addition, everyone should open a CaringBridge account. With caringbridge.org, you can directly and accurately communicate with everyone interested without having to repeat your friend’s story and status every time the phone rings. 
3. Offer to create and manage a schedule for your friend: for meal deliveries, rides to chemo, visits from friends, etc. Again, websites like takethemameal.com and lotsahelpinghands.com can help.
4. Understand that a cancer patient is probably too overwhelmed to ask what they need. Instead, take the initiative by offering specifics. For example, instead of saying, “Let me know if there’s anything I can do for you.” say, “Can I make dinner and deliver it to you on Tuesday?”
5. Deliver a meal. Make sure to ask your friend in advance if there are any dietary restrictions or they are following any guidelines. Then, stay for a visit, or just drop off the food if they’re not up for it (a cooler left outside the front door is perfect for this).
6. Deliver several pre-made meals in plastic containers so your friend can heat them up as needed and dispose of the container.
7. You may already know, or you can ask if your friend misses enjoying meals at a favorite restaurant. You probably know what kinds of food they like. So, pick out a nice dinner and have it delivered. 
8. Offer to take/accompany them to doctor’s visits, chemo, radiation, or the hospital. Sitting in a waiting room by yourself can be very boring and lonely.
9. Offer to take notes for them when the doctor/nurse is talking. Often the brain stops when a white coat walks into the examination room.
10. Help them write down the questions they want to ask their doctor. Without notes, it is easy to forget everything.
11. You can arrange to give them a ride on a regular basis or on certain days.
12. Give an Uber or Lyft gift certificate if you’re not available to give your friend a ride. 
13. Buy a monthly parking pass for family members when your friend has a prolonged hospitalization—hospital parking gets expensive!
14. Does your friend have kids? Offer to babysit, do a school pick-up, or have them over for a sleepover. It will let your friend rest.
15. Send gift cards to restaurants, grocery stores, and the pharmacy. They are appreciated as there are so many expenses that are not covered. 
16. Send a quick email, text, card, or message saying you’re thinking of them.
17. Add “no need to respond” to the end of your message - they’ll appreciate hearing from you without feeling the need to do anything in return.
18. Add “feel free to take me up on this offer whenever” when you offer help. Then, your friend will know your offer will still be there whenever they need it (in a week, a month, a year).
19. Set a calendar alert reminding you to regularly check in with a quick hello or offer of help.
20. Send a text to your friend the next time you are planning to go to the grocery store. Ask if you can pick anything up. You can even offer to stop on your way to the store and pick up their list. 
21. Call or send a text the next time you’re at the drugstore/pharmacy to see if they need any toiletries or a prescription picked up.
22. Arrange for a visit by a maid or cleaning service. Check if any special arrangements need to be made, such as securing a pet. Also, offer to come by and help organize before they come to maximize the benefit. There is a charity that provides free house cleaning for breast cancer patients. Here is the link: cleaningforareason.org/
23. Offer to do the laundry, do the dishes, load or empty the dishwasher.
24. Does your friend have a dog? Offer to walk, feed or take the dog to the groomer.
25. Send a gift certificate for an at-home massage.
26. Offer to visit, but make sure your friend is feeling up to it.
27. It is easy to feel disconnected when your life revolves around medical appointments. So, share the latest information about what is happening with family, office, neighbors, and church or social group members
28. Offer to take them out for a coffee or lunch date.
29. Rent a movie, offer to watch their favorite TV show together, or create a playlist of their favorite music.
30. Let them know you’re “on-call” for emergencies. Mean it!
31. Send a flower delivery. Just make sure your friend isn’t on neutropenic precautions first; fresh flowers can be an infection risk for cancer patients with weakened immune systems. Sadly, Peggie had to give away the many beautiful flower deliveries she received right after her diagnosis. Instead, consider silk flowers (no worries about causing infection, and they last longer). Also, cancer patients appreciate live plants (flower arrangements die! Enough said).
32. Give a magazine or newspaper subscription. A good book is also appreciated.
33. Tell your friend you love them. Even if they don’t have the energy to respond, your message means a lot.
34. For your female cancer friend or family member, take her out to a relaxing beauty treatment. Think manicure, pedicure, facial, makeup application, etc. It may be the first time she’s splurged on her appearance in a while. Check if this is permitted. If your friend is on chemotherapy, this may not be recommended. 
35. Send a card. Make sure it’s legible—cancer eyes are tired eyes :-)
36. Don’t ask for all the details about the current state of your friend’s health every time you visit or call.
37. Ask the patient or caregiver to assign a task to you. After performing the task, leave unless requested to stay. Your friend may be too tired for socialization.
38. Does your friend have a garden or house plants that need care? Offer to come by and do some watering and maintenance. Even better, commit to taking over the watering regularly. You can also offer to trim the hedges or mow the lawn.
39. If they have shared their diagnosis, leave heartfelt, uplifting messages on their Facebook page or other social media. Text or email a funny message, video, or photo.
40. Send funny jokes or buy funny movies for them to enjoy. Laughter is great medicine.
41. If you can and if your friend feels comfortable accepting it, give some cash or a financial gift card. Cancer can be a huge financial hit between hospital bills, copays, parking fees, and income loss, especially if one can’t work.
42.  If your company offers it, donate hours to cover time off when their paid time expires. You can also donate airline miles for medical travel.
43. If they are receiving chemotherapy, offer to take them shopping for a wig or scarves and caps. In addition, you can also give them a hat or scarf.
44. Leave little gifts on their doorstep or in their mailbox.
45. Give a super comfy blanket (good for couch lounging or trips to chemo).
46. Just listen. Don’t give advice, don’t try to be cheery—just listen and let your friend talk.
47. Please don’t cry in front of them. It’s hard for cancer patients to keep their composure in front of their families. “I can’t comfort you when I am the one facing cancer.”
48. Ask what they need from you most right now... and then do it. Cancer isn’t contagious—give your friend a hug to let them know you’re on their side. 
49. Congratulate them when they share the good news. Keep the success-conversation about the patient.
50. Remember to still be there a few months after the diagnosis, when it’s not so new anymore. The fanfare will have died down, but your friend will still be struggling and needing logistical and emotional help.
   Lesson: There are many things you can do. Just make sure you keep your commitments. Your friend and their loved ones will be counting on you to come through.
   

Chapter 12: Conversation Do’s and Don’ts for Caregivers and Friends
Peggie’s Story

   It is so interesting how your cancer diagnosis affects those around you. You end up comforting your friends and family because they are so devastated by your diagnosis. The funniest things come out of people’s mouths. Some comments I will remember the rest of my life, especially one in particular. Two days before my double mastectomy, I was at a fundraiser. A friend of my husband, Glen, came up and gave me a great big bear hug and asked about my upcoming surgery. I answered, “Yes, they are taking the breasts off on Tuesday.” His lightning-quick response was, “Can I have them when you are done with them?” Priceless! 
   Another story that deeply impacted me happened a few days after my diagnosis when my dearest friend Toni walked into my office looking like she hadn’t slept in days with tousled hair, no makeup, and puffy red eyes. She walked in and abruptly said, “I can’t be your friend any longer. I just can’t sit around and watch you die.” Once said, she turned around and left. I never saw her again. That was almost 20 years ago. 
   As impolite as some people can be, others, strangers, can rush in and give you the greatest gifts of all.
   These stories bring to mind both the good and bad things people say to cancer patients. 
   Here are some more positive things you can say:
* I don’t know what to say, but I want you to know I am here to listen or help.
* I hear what you’re saying, but I can’t imagine what it is like to go through what you are going through.
* Let’s do something together that brings you joy.
* If you feel up to a walk, I’ll be glad to walk with you.
* I would love to cook something special for you, what night works best for you? I’ll bring dinner and a special treat.
* If you are a survivor talking with a patient, you can share what it is like to be a survivor. You can also say that you were also scared and felt alone. But you want the patient to know that as you learned, you are not alone. You are there to offer help. 
* Ask the caregiver how they are coping and if there is anything that they need.
* Listen for their emotions in what they say and empathize but not sympathize. Instead, be positive and tell them, well done, keep up the good work. 
* Offer to listen or say, “Feel free to cry with me or to share how you are feeling or just sit in peace together.”
   Not everyone is sensitive to the feelings of a cancer patient. Perhaps they are well-intended, but they choose the wrong words. So, here are some things that you shouldn’t say:
* Don’t offer unsolicited advice. Every case is different. You don’t know the details, and medical decisions are theirs to make. 
* Don’t ask, “How are you feeling?” when you see a patient at an event or other activity outside the home. They feel compelled to say fine even if they are feeling terrible. Some people will even continue to press for an answer. What if the patient isn’t okay and doesn’t want to share, especially if other people are present?
* Some remarks like “don’t worry about it,” or “you’ll be fine.” Those words can be well-intended, but they dismiss the seriousness of cancer. 
* Other remarks, such as “they’ll find a cure soon,” may not be the truth and only give false hope or, worse, make the patient feel guilty that their life will end before there is a cure. But, unfortunately, there are cancers for which there is no cure and little hope for one.
* Saying, “Give me a call if you need something,” puts the responsibility on the patient who may already be overwhelmed. Instead, offer to do a specific task.
* Don’t comment on a person’s appearance. It will only make them feel worse. When they look in the mirror, they see the toll the disease takes on their body. So be happy to see them.
* Don’t make comments about being lucky to have a type of cancer. For example, “You are lucky. You only have stage one and not metastatic breast cancer.” No one who has cancer is lucky.
* Don’t say anything that places blame on the patient. Andrea died of lung cancer. While she was in treatment, people told Andrea that she shouldn’t have smoked. Even though she never smoked.
* Don’t say, “What’s your prognosis?” Instead, if the patient shares it with you, you can ask, “What is the next step?”
* Please don’t ask someone how long they have to live. It is like a punch to the gut. Doctors have been proven wrong time and time again
* Don’t tell cancer patients that everything happens for a reason. That may not be part of their beliefs and might be agitating to them.
* It is really upsetting when someone tells a patient about a friend that died of cancer. It is never the right time for those comments or stories.
* Don’t question the survivor’s medical decisions. Those decisions are theirs to make.
* We hope you won’t avoid your friend with cancer because of your fears or not knowing what to say. Unfortunately, we both have lost friends who couldn’t deal with our cancer. When you are battling cancer, you need your friends, and you still need to feel connected to the rest of the world. Engage in cheerful conversations about everyday things.
   Lesson: Friendship and communication are essential to cancer patients anywhere along their journey. Words can be painful. So, be careful with your words, whether you are a survivor, caregiver, friend, or family member.







Section Two
Fighting the Battle and Moving Forward
   


Chapter 13 Navigating the Financial Challenges of Breast Cancer

   During April’s cancer treatment, she wrote to her health insurance company and told them that they were worse than her cancer; she could cut cancer out, but she still had to deal with them. Most of her frustration was because she naively thought that everything done in that hospital was covered under her plan when she went to a hospital participating in her plan. Boy, was she wrong! 
   When diagnosed with cancer, you are sent for various tests, blood work, scans, sonograms, mammograms, and other examinations. What is not communicated clearly in our health system is that most hospitals consist of independent contractors. In a participating hospital, the basic services, such as the operating, recovery, and hospital rooms, are covered. Other charges are a different matter. Unfortunately, it was not until the third surgery that April learned her anesthesiologist, the x-ray technician, the radiologist, and the lab testing her tissue were considered out-of-network providers. As a result, she was responsible for most of their charges.
   The National Cancer Institute, a division of the National Institutes of Health, reports that cancer is one of the most expensive medical conditions in the United States. So, it is critical that you understand the big picture plan for your treatment and care, then determine what is covered under your insurance coverage. You must be your own financial advocate and ask the provider of every treatment or service if they accept your insurance plan. Focusing on beating cancer is stressful. So, adding bills, the insurance company’s rejection of claims, expensive medications, and treatments create even more stress and anxiety.
   April found this out from experience. She was diagnosed on a Wednesday and had a lumpectomy two days later. When the lab results from the surgery came back, they showed she needed another surgery. The surgeon needed to remove more tissue to ensure there were no cancerous cells in the outer edges of the removed tissue. The second procedure was successful, and the surgeon achieved clean margins. Unfortunately, two days after receiving the clear margins report, April was back in surgery. In the third trip to the operating room, the surgeon inserted the tube and balloon used for internal Mammosite radiation. It is a high-targeted dose of radiation to the area where recurrence is most likely to develop. It is part of a strategy for lumpectomy patients to conserve breast tissue.
   As you can imagine, her only focus was on trying to heal, keeping her job, coping with pain pills and antibiotics, and trying not to be scared out of her mind. Then the invoices and statements started to arrive. Please know, like April, your head is not into the bills during this time. It is into grasping the idea that you have cancer and finding ways of trying to beat it.
   Since she had not been sick and therefore had not paid her insurance company’s $2,500 deductible, the hospital wanted the entire deductible before the first surgery. When all the bills started to come in, the insurance company said she was responsible for the first $2,500 billed. Since the hospital had not submitted their bill, the insurance company refused to credit her for paying the entire deductible.
   April received a pile of letters from the insurance company saying her providers were out of their network. April wrote many letters to the insurance company and was unsure how many calls she made. Finally, someone explained to her that even though the hospital is on your plan, the hospital providers don’t necessarily take your insurance. April was persistent. Exasperated, she asked, “Do I have to go across the street to get knocked out and come back to the hospital for the surgery under my plan?” Then the insurance company paid the anesthesiologist.
   There is nothing more frustrating than writing to your insurance company to appeal a decision to decline a claim and then have the doctor’s office harass you for payment. This happened to April even though she copied them on the appeal letters. The provider’s billing department will threaten you with ruining your credit or tell you to make the payment now and let the insurance company reimburse you. Neither of those proposed actions is an option because you must preserve your credit. In addition, there are so many not-covered expenses that you can’t pay the provider and wait for reimbursement. 
   What can you do to prevent the stress and anxiety caused by financial issues? First, organize your digital and paper filing system to deal with the mountain of paperwork you will receive. We have created separate electronic and paper folders for bills, statements, paid invoices, and a “to be filed” folder. The last one is necessary as sometimes you don’t have the energy or desire to do the filing.
   Many health care providers, hospitals, and insurance companies have moved to digital communication. That is the reason we create digital file folders. We also back up the files on an external hard drive or flash drive at least once per week. In addition, we scan our insurance cards in case someone forgets to return them or, worse yet, we lose them. It is a good practice to keep a running list of your vaccinations and other standard medical treatments. In addition, keep a digital list of your medical procedures and the associated provider. We have found it to be invaluable. The provider’s office staff can easily upload them from a flash drive.
   Next, meet with the patient advocate, financial services representative, or social worker at the treatment facility. This person can help you determine the coverage for your treatment plan. You may also seek help in this area with a caseworker at your insurance company or the benefits manager at your place of employment. Finally, make sure that you check things like your disability pay and allotted sick time. In April’s case, her employer classified time off as short-term or long-term, and each had different compensation plans.
   Don’t worry if you can’t afford the prescribed treatments or prescriptions. There are many federal, state, and local programs to help with expenses. Also, pharmaceutical manufacturers offer programs for a reduced cost based on your financial situation, age, and other criteria. In addition, many charitable organizations are focused on helping breast cancer patients with finances and services. For example, at Phyllis’ church, they provided meals, babysitting, and rides to medical appointments. One charity Phyllis worked with helped cancer patients by paying their electric bills or their mortgage. 
   If you live in a remote area or the medical centers in your area cannot provide the treatment you need or want, you may have to travel. If you cannot afford to pay for the stay at that location, there are places where you can stay at no cost. For example, Nick’s House, headstrong.org/our-services/nicks-house, outside of Philadelphia, was started through the generosity of the Colleluori family. The cost is covered by fundraising and grants, and there are no costs to the patient. Here are several more websites where you can locate help: 
* cancer.org/treatment/support-programs-and-services/patient-lodging/hope-lodge.html
* cancercare.org/
* cancer.org/treatment/support-programs-and-services/road-to-recovery.html
* patienttravel.org/

Another organization that may be of help to you is Flying Angels. Their air ambulance alternative provides non-emergency transport services on commercial airlines with patients accompanied by an experienced RN flight nurse. They make the reservations and handle all the paperwork. You can learn more about the details of their services at flyingangels.com.
   We suggest that you check if the hospital and its associated providers accept your insurance and what your costs would be. You may choose a different hospital or provider based on your coverage and your financial situation. There are differences in charges among hospitals and doctors. In addition, many hospitals have patient navigators and social services team members that can help you find financial help. They may also be able to arrange payments that fit your budget. You can negotiate a low-cost payment of even five dollars per month as long as you pay consistently and on time. They will not offer this arrangement to you. You must be proactive and ask.
   Lesson: You must NOT delay or avoid treatment due to financial issues. You are important, and there are resources to help you with the insurance and finances. Get organized and get assistance whenever you need it.


Chapter 14: Getting Ready
for a Mastectomy

   No one gave us a list of things that you need to get before you have a mastectomy. We discovered we needed these things by trial and error, or oops, why didn’t someone tell me. So, we want to help you get organized and have less stress. 
   Next, we wanted to share a list of things to buy before surgery and important links to where you can obtain them. 
   What a surprise to find the comfortable T-shirt or sweatshirt you packed for your journey home is outlawed by the discharge nurse. Your doctor or the nurse will tell you not to raise your arms over your head, especially if your lymph nodes were removed. So, bring a soft button-down the front shirt, elastic waist pants, and slip-on shoes for the ride home. Pack comfortable underwear, slippers/moccasins with non-skid soles. If you don’t like the hospital non-skid socks, you can bring some cute fluffy non-skid socks from home. You don’t need to pack a bra as you will have bandages and perhaps a stretchy bandeau to keep them in place. You may want to buy some camisoles so you can change and launder them. Leave your jewelry and all valuables at home. You do not want to lose something that has both sentimental and financial value. Do take your favorite magazines and perhaps the book you are currently reading.
   There are several types of reconstruction. If you plan to have reconstruction that includes expanders, we suggest purchasing a camisole designed to wear after surgery. It holds the drains, and the size of the cotton inserts can be adjusted as expanders are filled while preparing for reconstruction. You can purchase it from Damozelle. Amoena Hannah 2860 Breast Surgery Recovery Camisole (damozelle.com).
   Organize the clothes you will wear when you return home. Make sure you have enough comfortable outfits, especially shirts that button down the front, sweatshirts that zip all the way down the front, and sweatpants or loose-fitting slacks. You may want to treat yourself to some pajamas that have button-down the front tops. Buy some big safety pins as you may need to pin your drains to your surgical bra or the lanyard you used for your company badge. It works great. Speaking of drains, you may want to cut the pockets in your tops so you can put your drains in them. Also, buy some medical gloves for emptying the drains and changing bandages.
   After surgery, you’re told not to get the surgical area wet. We both remember taking showers wearing trash bags fastened with duct tape. It worked reasonably well, but it was not the best solution. We suggest buying a shower shirt. It has pockets for your drains and keeps the surgery area dry. It will be easier to put on and keep the surgical area dryer than the trash bags. The Shower Shirt Post Surgery Shower Garment-White-Small/Medium (wholesalepoint.com).
   You want to be comfortable and protect your breast after surgery. But, you also want to get a good night’s sleep. A heart-shaped pillow can safeguard your surgery site or your armpit. Like a lot of things these days, it is easy to buy online at Amazon. Post-Surgical Breast Cancer Recovery Pillow - Mastectomy or Cardiac Pillow: Health & Personal Care (amazon.com).
   Phyllis liked the compassionate and knowledgeable help she received at the store specializing in post-mastectomy bras and breast forms. You may not have a store near you or feel comfortable with personal attention. In that case, you can order different types of breast forms, bras, T-shirts, pajamas, and swimwear designed for post-mastectomy patients from Amazon or Health Products for You. Post Mastectomy Supplies On Sale: Mastectomy Bras (healthproductsforyou.com).
   Although the hospital will give you small bars of soap, you might want to bring your own. Some women recommend packing baby wipes for freshening up. Also, pack your hairbrush, and if you have long hair, pack hair ties, headbands, or scrunchies. If you will be in the hospital longer than overnight, you may also want to pack dry shampoo. Your doctor will not allow you to use underarm deodorant as you will have drains in your underarm. So, you can leave that item at home. You should also leave body lotion and creams at home. Your doctor or nurse will list these items as a ‘No’ while you have stitches as they could cause infection.
   You may receive pain-relieving drugs like morphine or Vicodin for the first few days after your surgery. One side effect of these medications is constipation. Make a note to ask for a laxative if your doctor does not prescribe it for you. You may also want to ask which brand of laxative your doctor recommends for home use after surgery. Laxatives that are primarily made of natural fiber are the gentlest and work well.
   You probably have a thermometer and an ice pack in your bathroom at home. If you don’t have them, we strongly recommend buying them before going to the hospital. You want to alert your doctor if your temperature rises above 100 degrees Fahrenheit. In addition, the ice pack will reduce swelling and discomfort, particularly in your armpit.
   Your surgeon will not allow you to drive until your drains are removed. To begin driving again, you must feel comfortable and safe turning the steering wheel, stopping quickly, and no longer taking narcotic medications. Remember your seat belt tightens when you stop quickly or apply the brakes with a strong force. So, we suggest purchasing a sheepskin seat belt cover to protect your surgery site. You can buy it at the local auto supply store or Amazon. Soft Australian Genuine Sheepskin Wool Auto Seat Belt Cover Seatbelt Shoulder Pad for a More Comfortable Driving, Compatible with All Cars: Automotive (amazon.com).
   Friends and family will want to help when you return home. So, work with your lead caregiver to arrange meals and housekeeping activities for the first few weeks after you come home. It is easier to organize these responsibilities while you are feeling well. The website lotsahelpinghands.com or a book-size planner will help track the volunteers and their assigned tasks. Some people like to ensure they have their favorite meals available, so they prepare and freeze them before their surgery.
   While you are planning for help, don’t forget to make an appointment to have your hair cut and colored if you color it. It may be a while before you can go to the hair salon again. You also want to get a manicure and pedicure or give yourself one. Please note some medical teams say no polish or clear polish during surgery while others say light colors only. The nurse will tell you they want to see the skin under your nails as one way to monitor your status while under anesthesia so, be safe and go with the clear polish. 
   Get a grabber. It is terrific for reaching things that are high or on the floor. You must be careful not to cause injury while you are recovering. Little tools like a grabber are great. They are low-cost and available in a variety of styles at Amazon. Grabber Reacher Tool (amazon.com). 
   A laptop desk is another handy gadget for those first few weeks at home. You might want to consider one like this that will hold your phone, but there are many options and prices at Amazon. HUANUO Lap Desk for Laptop, Notebook, MacBook, Tablet (amazon.com). 
   Take it slow. A mastectomy is a major surgery. If you take it slow, you will heal for sure, and there will be no need for additional treatment or surgery. On the other hand, jumping in and doing things too early will delay the healing process and can damage your surgery site.
   Lesson: Like the Girl Scout saying, “Be Prepared.” Make a list of things and services you will need and work with a caregiver or friend to get everything organized and completed before going to the hospital. It will make your journey easier for you.


Chapter 15: Facing the Mirror
Peggie’s Story

   In the weeks after my surgery, as I stepped out of the shower into my mirrored dressing room, my mind unconsciously would go through its checklist: two eyes, one nose, one mouth, two arms, no breasts, no nipples… sigh! The reality of breast cancer struck daily. Finally, six months later, after the reconstructive surgery was complete, I actually heard my brain run through the checklist. Two eyes ~ check, one nose ~ check, one mouth ~ check, two arms ~ check, two breasts ~ check, two nipples ~ check. There was a silent sigh of relief for me. I may be scared, but I have all my pieces back. 
   Most women who have mastectomies, especially younger women, choose to have reconstruction. It is a personal choice to have reconstruction or to become what others call themselves, a flattie. If you choose reconstruction, there are many options available. Your cancer treatment and body type, and personal preference determine the choice best for you. The most common type of reconstruction is implant surgery. It is typically done in stages. Some women have implants inserted at the time of the mastectomy. While others have a temporary device called an expander inserted. It is swapped for a silicone or saline implant in a later surgery. The next stage is the reconstruction of the nipple. Some surgeons save the patient’s nipple, and some construct the nipple out of the skin they save. The final surgery attaches the nipple. If it is a created nipple, the doctor tattoos it to give it the natural color.
   Another reconstruction technique is the autologous tissue reconstruction technique. In this surgery, fat and skin are taken from another body area to rebuild a breast. Typically, the tissue is taken from your back or your buttocks. So, there are no expanders required with this surgery. But, the recovery time with this process is longer than with implant surgery. 
   There is also a common technique in autologous reconstruction that uses tissue from the stomach area. There are variations in this surgery. Some versions take the muscle, whereas others take only fat and skin. Your doctor will discuss considerations, such as the strength of your abdomen, posture, and flexibility after surgery. Patients have reported more post-surgical pain in their bellies than in their breasts. Plastic surgeons explain that patients should not expect to go from a size 18 to a size 10 with this surgery. 
   You may worry that your insurance company will not cover reconstruction. You can rest assured that insurance companies and Medicare are required to cover plastic surgery related to breast reconstruction. In addition, the Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act was passed in 1998 to ensure it would be covered.
   As we researched this topic, we found there are women around the world who want to see something different when they look in the mirror. They don’t want a skin-sparing mastectomy because they are not interested in reconstruction. They do not consider the mastectomy technique that leaves skin for reconstruction an attractive final result. Instead, they want an aesthetic flat closure. In today’s methods, when no reconstruction is performed, the pec muscle is not removed. This means the patient’s chest is flat rather than concave as surgeries were in the past for radical mastectomies. 
   When asked why they advocate for a flat aesthetic closure, they reply that they do not want to undergo more surgeries. These women are forming groups and starting non-profit organizations to support and advocate for an aesthetic flat closure to be a viable, healthy choice. If you are interested in this option, you can check out the following organizations:
* Flatclosurenow.org
* Notputtingonashirt.org
   Flatties Unite has a private Facebook page. You can request to join if you are interested.
   Lesson: It is all about bringing hope, rejuvenating the spirit, knowing that you are not alone in any surgical choice, and realizing that you can and will laugh again.

Chapter 16: Understanding Chemotherapy and the Do’s and Don’ts 

   Depending upon the type and stage of breast cancer you have, your doctor may prescribe chemotherapy. This treatment is given for one of three reasons: cure your cancer, reduce your symptoms, and prolong your life. The treatments have come a long way in recent years. Today, chemotherapy regimens are more specific to all characteristics of patients.
   Let’s begin our discussion by explaining what chemotherapy is. It is the administration of a drug or almost always a combination of drugs. The drugs are given into your vein through a port. The port is a medical device surgically inserted under your skin with a plastic tube that connects it to your vein. The port may remain in place for as long as six months after your treatment ends. It is not removed right away as some people need additional treatments. Usually, you will go to a hospital or cancer treatment center for a specified number of treatment sessions.
   How does it work? Let’s first describe cancer and then explain how chemotherapy affects cancer. The simplest way to describe cancer is to think about a cell with its on/off switch broken in the on position. A normal cell will divide, and once it divides, the on/off switch in that cell turns off until the cell is healthy enough to divide again. A cancer cell splits in two, and with the on/off switch stuck on ‘on,’ it continues to split. This creates many unhealthy cells that gobble up resources and crowd out healthy cells. Chemotherapy prevents cancer from growing and traveling to other areas in your body. Since the drugs don’t know the difference between cancer cells and the healthy cells in your body, they will also prevent those cells from splitting. Unfortunately, the cells in your bone marrow, digestive tract, nails, and hair follicles are most sensitive to the chemotherapy drugs as they divide rapidly. So, it leads to the side effects of nausea, fatigue, and hair loss. But rest assured, these side effects are temporary. You will feel stronger, your uneasy stomach or vomiting will go away, and your hair will grow back.
   Now you know what it is and how it works. If your doctor recommends chemotherapy, you’ll still have many questions. Some of your first questions are probably: Why do I need chemotherapy? Is it to cure my cancer? Will I need surgery and chemotherapy too? Is it to prevent cancer from spreading or to keep it from coming back? What is the name of the drug or drugs, and what are the side effects?
   Once your doctor has explained why they are prescribing chemotherapy, you’ll want to know how, where, and how long you’ll receive your treatments. Your doctor will recommend the hospital or treatment center and a suggested start date. Don’t forget to check your coverage before you begin. Make sure the facility is in your plan and what percentage of the cost will be paid. In addition, check the amount of co-pay you will be responsible for on each visit and the deductible for the year. If you do not have insurance, check with the facility administrator or the social worker to help you find assistance with payments.
   The health care provider at the facility will explain the drugs you will receive and the schedule for receiving them. They will also tell you how long each treatment will take. Many facilities allow you to bring a family member or friend to accompany you on treatment day. Some provide movies and books to entertain you while you receive your chemo. For example, one of Phyllis’ family members received chemotherapy treatment at a major hospital in Philadelphia. Phyllis was a supportive family member, and they both received Reiki massage treatments on the day of the chemo treatment. Reiki is a Japanese complementary medicine that transfers healing energy through the practitioner’s hands to generate emotional and psychological healing. Other facilities provide cold mittens and booties to reduce the effects on your nails. In addition, you can pack a carry-all bag or a backpack with the items we found will give you comfort and something to keep you busy during treatments:
* Sweater or sweatshirt (Button or zip down the front for access to your port)
* Hat, scarf, or beanie (your head may be bald from treatment)
* A cold cap (Cold caps are tightly fitting, hats filled with a cold gel or liquid that you wear during chemotherapy infusions. The FDA found 50 to 66% of women who used them reduced the amount of hair loss. They can be rented or purchased. The caps may not be within your budget)
* A favorite blanket and pillow
* Slippers or comfy socks
* Bottle of water and or juice and snacks
* Toothpaste, toothbrush, and mouthwash
* Chewing gum or mints with Xylitol (helpful for dry mouth)
* Smartphone or music player and headphones
* Your favorite music or meditation files 
* Book or magazines
* Crossword puzzles or games
* Tablet (for games or digital books)
* Playing cards
* Craft (knitting, crochet, embroidery, or another small project)
* Your journal for notes and medical records
* Thank you cards and a pen to write while waiting
* Lip balm
* Lidocaine cream, bandage, and tape for IV infusion site (ask the doctor)
* A bucket or plastic bag just in case nausea occurs on the way home
   You should eat a healthy diet and get your vitamins and minerals naturally. But many people today don’t eat enough fruit, vegetables, and other healthy foods. In addition, other people suffer from food allergies. That’s why so many people take vitamins and supplements.
   Some vitamins and supplements are beneficial. But, some do not mix with the chemo drugs and can cause side effects or negatively impact the effectiveness of your treatment. There are now over 100 chemotherapy drugs. If your doctor prescribes chemotherapy, it is essential to discuss the vitamins and supplements you take with your doctor and a nutritionist experienced in cancer treatment if your health care facility has one. They can provide lists of vitamins and supplements you should take and those to avoid with every drug or drug combination. In addition to vitamins and supplements, there are foods that you should eat and those you should avoid.
   Whether you are eating at home or in a restaurant, be aware of the spices in foods. Like vitamins and supplements, foods can impact your treatment. 
   Chemotherapy can cause a condition called myelosuppression which can mean your doctor will limit or pause your treatment. It can also be a life-threatening side effect. What is myelosuppression, and what happens if it occurs? The chemotherapy can damage bone marrow which leads to blood cell issues. Red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets are created in your bone marrow. Damage or loss of these blood elements causes a variety of complications. First, red blood cells have an oxygen-carrying protein called hemoglobin. When you lose these cells, you become anemic and suffer fatigue. You may also suffer other symptoms such as shortness of breath, headache, dizziness, fainting, or an irregular heartbeat.
   Your blood platelets allow your blood to clot. If you experience a low platelet count, you can bruise easily, take a long time to form a clot, or even hemorrhage. In addition, you can experience headaches, nose bleeds, bloody gums, and heavy periods. There are also serious side effects such as bloody vomiting or stools, which is a sign of internal bleeding. 
   A relatively common impact is a lower production of a type of white blood cell called neutrophils. Suppose the chemotherapy causes a loss or insufficient production of these cells. In that case, your immune system is compromised, and you are then vulnerable to infection. In addition, your B cells are the source of antibodies. Their loss or damage can lead to low immunity and poor response to vaccines. 
   Different chemotherapy drugs or drug combinations affect blood cell production in different ways. While our research found that most side effects experienced are not life-threatening, they certainly impact your quality of life. Therefore, we strongly recommend discussing with your oncologist the type of chemotherapy you will receive and the possible side effects. Together you can weigh the benefits and risks.
   Your level of activity during chemotherapy will depend upon how tired or sick you feel. Exercise, especially aerobic exercise, can reduce your stress, anxiety and help you feel more energetic. Just don’t push yourself too far. If you are feeling ill or exhausted, don’t exercise. Instead, give yourself some time to rest and recover. If you do exercise, experts say you need at least thirty minutes three times per week. Phyllis hits the gym every day for a workout on the elliptical machine and some weightlifting. When the weather is nice, she enjoys a walk in the park or on a nature trail.
   Exercise releases a chemical in your brain called endorphins. This chemical helps you improve your outlook and quality of life. Participating in physical activity during chemo can help you with chemo brain or brain fog. You can also get a better night’s sleep and reduce your side effects. In addition, research results show that exercise can boost your immunity and reduce the risk of cancer returning. These are all great reasons for putting physical activity on your schedule. Read Living Through Breast Cancer by Carolyn M. Kaelin, M.D., M.P.H. if you need some indoor exercise activities. The book has a complete chapter on exercise with graphics and directions for each exercise. There are also DVDs available online, or you can watch free videos on YouTube.
   Are you familiar with chemo brain? If not, it is what cancer patients call thinking and memory problems experienced during chemotherapy. At the time of this writing, researchers do not have any scientific evidence determining the cause. One small study at UCLA suggests that chemo drugs may impact the nerves in the brain. Another report indicates that chemo may indirectly affect your immune system, affecting the brain. Chemo brain is not related to your age, gender, or a particular type of cancer. That said, the drugs in chemotherapy may not be the cause of the problem. It could also be related to lack of sleep, fatigue, medication, general aging, or any number of other factors.
   Don’t be alarmed if chemo brain happens to you. Arash Asher, M.D. of Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, found that about 75% of chemotherapy patients experience this side effect. Dr. Asher states that it is usually resolved about 6-9 months after finishing chemotherapy treatments. After completing your chemotherapy, you can try decaf green tea and Ginkgo Biloba, which people have reported helpful. Green tea comes in typical forms and comes in concentrate form to drop in water. Make sure you do not use green tea during chemo; it will counteract the drugs. Check with your doctor before you take Ginkgo Biloba. You may have a medical condition or medications that prohibit its use.
   A hospital or cancer treatment center near you may offer a rehabilitation, wellness, and resilience program to help patients cope with the effects of chemo brain. Also, your symptoms will usually improve as your diet and activity return to normal.
   It is essential to protect yourself from infection during chemotherapy. For that reason, stay away from sick people. Doctors and nurses also strongly recommend avoiding crowds. Germs can spread more easily in large groups and raise the risk of infection. Carry a bottle of hand sanitizer as you may not be near soap and water. We also like to have sanitizing wipes with us all the time. We hate to mention it, but we see many people NOT washing their hands after using the restroom. So, we use the wipes on the door handle. We also like them for places like elevators, escalators, and ATM keypads. Chemotherapy can weaken your immune system, so it is critical you protect it.
   You should also take care when performing personal care activities, such as shaving, manicures, and pedicures. Toothbrushing may not be an action that comes to mind when you think of infection, but germs can enter your gums and cause various illnesses. So, gently brush your teeth at least two times per day and use a new toothbrush every three months or less. Be careful with mouthwash if you develop mouth sores because it may aggravate them. Finally, you may want to wear a mask in areas like the hospital or doctor’s office to protect yourself from other diseases.
   Your friends may ask if it is safe for them to visit you while you are receiving chemotherapy. Of course, it is safe for family and friends to spend time with you. Be aware that you, caregivers, and visitors must take care not to come in contact with body fluids like vomit and urine or feces for the first few days following the treatment. When cleaning up, you or your caregiver should wear gloves and wash your hands with soap and warm water for at least twenty seconds. How do you know if you have reached twenty seconds? Sing the Happy Birthday song or Row, Row, Row Your Boat twice.
   You may be wondering not only about the short-term effects of chemotherapy but also the long-term effects. One of the side effects that may be permanent with chemotherapy is the impact on hormones produced by your ovaries. If you are in your early forties or younger, ask your doctor about this impact because the chemotherapy may cause early menopause or impact your ability to conceive a baby. Another long-term effect may be weight gain. 
   It is now common knowledge in the medical community that chemo is causing heart issues. Therefore, doctors are now recommending everyone starting chemo should see an oncology cardiologist. They will take extra care to prevent heart problems. In addition, your doctor will order various tests before giving these drugs to make sure you have no pre-existing heart problems. In exceedingly rare cases, leukemia has also occurred. Suppose this treatment is recommended for your type of cancer. In that case, you and your doctor will weigh the risks versus the benefits. 
   It is natural to feel scared, worried, and depressed when diagnosed with a life-threatening illness. In addition, chemotherapy and its side effects can affect your mood and outlook. Complementary therapies like yoga, guided visualization, acupuncture, and aromatherapy are helpful. If you feel you need more help coping, see a therapist, or tell your doctor. They can prescribe something to help you manage.
   Lesson: Ask questions so you can work with your medical team and take control. Participate in your treatment plan. Finally, actively do things that will reduce side effects and help you recover. 

Chapter 17: But You’ve Got to Eat
	
   During chemotherapy, many people genuinely have little desire to eat. That’s because chemo is brutal stuff. The side effects vary based on the regime and your body’s reaction to the treatment. Granted, the impacts on your body can feel absolutely horrible, but please rest assured, they are temporary. Peggie has been running cancer camps since 1999 and willingly shares with you approaches to food and eating that she has found to work. Feel free to share her information, and there is no credit necessary. If possible, include a nutritionist specializing in cancer care on your medical team. Also, check with the nurse or patient navigator as their services are generally available and paid by your insurance. Finally, check with your insurance company to be sure it is covered.
   Although the movies and television often depict women suffering severe vomiting and diarrhea, not everyone has that reaction. If you develop nausea, try some shaved natural ginger or ginger ale. It can help calm your upset stomach. You can also try soothing your upset stomach with some saltine crackers, rice, and oatmeal, as they are bland. We have met with some women who use seasick bands to help control their nausea and upset stomach, while other women have found relief with acupuncture. It is also helpful for pain and other symptoms
   Listen to your stomach. If you are experiencing bouts of an extremely upset stomach, tell your chemo nurse or doctor. Fortunately, there are many new drugs on the market that will help you feel much better.
   Sometimes, chemotherapy can cause you to develop blisters in your mouth, and more than likely, they go all the way down your throat. The blisters make it extremely uncomfortable to eat, let alone enjoy food. So, try some milkshakes. They go down easy because they are cold and creamy. Also, try smoothies with fresh fruit except for oranges and pineapple as they are high in citric acid. Smoothies are both nutritious and delicious. You can find a good variety of fruits all year round. Another way to help with those painful mouth sores during chemotherapy is to drink iced beverages or eat popsicles. 
   Chemotherapy is known to create a metallic taste in your mouth. Your silverware can magnify that metallic taste. Try changing to plastic knives, forks, and spoons because the plastic utensils don’t increase the metallic taste. You’ll have a better chance of enjoying your food. You can also try the advice of some campers who told us that they’re fond of spicy food as it helps mask the metallic taste. Check with your oncologist or nutritionist as some spicy foods affect certain chemotherapy combinations.
   Heightened sensitivity to smells can also make it difficult to enjoy a meal. For example, you may have felt hungry and asked your friend or family member to make something to eat. They suggest one of your favorite dishes. It sounds delicious, and you’re eagerly awaiting your treat. But unfortunately, the smell of food cooking can make you nauseous even before they bring the meal to you. If you are sensitive or nauseated by the smell of food cooking, try not to cook in your house. Perhaps you can ask a neighbor if your family member or friend preparing the meal can use their kitchen. One of Phyllis’ neighbors had this sensitivity in addition to having a full schedule. So, for several months, Phyllis delivered ready-to-serve complete meals for the family on chemotherapy day. 
   Here’s an important tip: don’t let family members overfill your plate. If your well-meaning caregiver puts a plate full of food in front of you, it can seem so overwhelming that you can’t even begin to eat. So, ask them to put a small portion on your plate. If you finish that plate and you want more, then get another serving.
   Many campers have found eating five or six small meals helpful. If you try that approach, make sure those small meals are part of a balanced diet. Of course, people will tell you to eat veggies, but fruit and nuts are important too. Even the nutritionists for Olympic athletes recommend a variety of foods, including vegetables, fruits, nuts, seeds, and sprouts. A diet that contains these foods will provide the “essential” amino acids to help your body build the proteins and develop the cells to recover. 
   Don’t worry if you want only cheese sandwiches, pudding, Jell-O, or warm tea. Sometimes, we long for some comfort food as it sits nicely on our stomachs. We imagine a plate or bowl of mashed potatoes, macaroni and cheese, some pasta, or an omelet. If you are craving a particular food, then eat it. For example, you may want steak or liver all the time. Such a craving could be a sign of a vitamin deficiency. So, eat the food but also let your doctor and nutritionist know. They can change your diet recommendations, or they may recommend some supplements. 
   We’ve learned that it is critical to hydrate often. Drink plenty of water, keep a water bottle with you all the time. Your oncologist will tell you that flushing all the toxins out of your body is essential to your recovery. Nutritionists and survivors often mention Gatorade, Pedialyte, and chicken soup. They are the old standbys. Do you know why? Because they work. 
   A family or team member may suggest to well-wishers who provide a meal that they deliver your meal in a disposable container or one that doesn’t need to be returned. Then you don’t have to figure out which container belongs to whom and how to arrange to get it back to them. If you feel too sick to be a good host, then ask them to leave the meal at the front door. If you feel up to having company, invite the guest(s) to sit with you while you eat. A lively conversation about something happening in the “real world” will lift your mood and make the visit special.
   I bet you remember your dentist telling you to be sure to brush after every meal. While you are receiving chemotherapy, brushing is more important than ever. That’s because chemo leaches the calcium out of teeth and bones. In addition, you don’t want to have oral surgery during or after the chemotherapy if you can avoid it. So, brush your teeth and use some enamel protective toothpaste and mouthwash for added protection. 
   Lesson: Take it slow, drink lots of fluids and remember to eat something. It may be months before you can enjoy a delicious fish or a huge steak and fries. But, believe us, that day will come.
    

Chapter 18: Don’t Forget to Laugh
Peggie’s Stories

   I will never forget the look on my husband’s face when the nurse pulled the hospital curtain open to announce, “Hi, I’m Sally. I am a surgical nurse, and I will be in the operating room with you today. Do you have any questions?” Sometimes, these nurses are way too perky for me. With my forefinger, I motioned her towards me. I whispered, “Dr. Halpern says that he is going to make my nipples and areolas out of the excess skin under my arm. If you see him cutting anywhere near the armpit hair, I want you to stop him because I am coming after you if I wake up with hairy nipples. Can you remember that? You won’t forget, will you?” She nodded her assurance and quickly exited the room. A moment later, Dr. David Halpern came in laughing and told me to stop scaring the nurses. Before my double M surgery, I had this one hair that drove me crazy. I did not think I would have to take off my entire breast to get rid of it, and I did not want it back after all I had been through. Luckily, Dr. Halpern knows I am crazy, and using humor to deal with this horrid disease is my way of coping.
   After one of my lumpectomies, I was in post-op when four of my friends came in dressed in wigs, rhinestone glasses, tiaras, pink boas, and glitter all over. They had kept my husband company during my surgery and had the entire waiting room in an uproar. Then, finally, the nurses were laughing, and everyone felt better, especially me.
   Once a friend of ours, Pamela, went in for a biopsy. The group of us keeping her husband company had signed a Troll card. Then we asked the nurses to take it to her to read while she was waiting to go into surgery. On several occasions, we, as a group, would wear Troll earrings just for giggles. So, we sent in a bunch of Troll earrings for the recovery room nurses to wear. When Pamela came out of the anesthesia, she thought she was going crazy because all the nurses were wearing troll earrings. Then she burst out laughing, saying, “They got to you, didn’t they?” She knew we were there and that everything was going to be all right.
   I’ve heard it said that laughter is the best medicine, and research proves that is true. Of course, it is not easy to laugh when you are going through the effects of cancer and the side effects of treatment. Friends and loved ones can help reduce the stress and anxiety you may be feeling by bringing humor into your life. Studies show that laughter actually creates physical changes in your body. You relax when you laugh, and that relieves muscle tension. In addition, research has found that your heart rate and blood pressure will temporarily rise. This is because laughter causes your breathing to become deeper, causing oxygen to rush through your bloodstream, increasing circulation. It also causes the brain to release endorphins, which are nature’s pain killers. 
   Sometimes, you don’t feel like laughing, and you fake it, but it soon becomes a real laugh. Of course, it is great to have a strong support system and friends whose antics make you laugh. We have some suggestions that can bring some laughter into your life anytime. 
* You can watch funny movies, cartoons, or old family videos of fun times. 
* Read the comic strip in the newspaper or online.
* Read jokes online or in a book.
* Try writing about something that happened that day as a funny story. For example, Phyllis had radioactive iodine therapy for her thyroid cancer. So, she wrote about how the technician with the Geiger counter looked like Darth Vader in his protective gear.
* Draw something funny.
* Play a fun game with family or friends.
* Lynn’s children created a funny skit to perform for her. She still laughs when she thinks of it. 
   Lesson: Just because you are fighting cancer does not mean you need to walk around moping all the time. Or that people must tiptoe around and speak in whispers. Try to look for the brighter side of things and remember to laugh. Have a good “belly” laugh; it is great medicine.

Chapter 19: The Power of 
Positive Thinking
Phyllis’ Story

   When I was diagnosed with breast cancer, my co-worker Chuck took me to lunch and told me a story about how he overcame terminal cancer. He had been diagnosed with cancer in multiple organs. His oncologist told him he was being moved to a section of the hospital floor with other terminally ill patients where he would be more comfortable. Chuck was determined he was not going to be a victim and die. He called his wife, and she arranged to have him transferred to MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas. Chuck had surgery and received high doses of chemotherapy. He looked terrible for a few months. Some people at the office told me they thought he might fall over and die as he was so skinny and pale. But Chuck was determined to not only survive but to thrive. He regained his strength, and 30 years later, he is still cancer-free and enjoying great success in his personal and professional life.
   My plastic surgeon was with me through multiple surgeries, MRSA infection, skin death on one of my breasts, and a boat accident that crushed one implant. He told me that he had patients who had fewer challenges but died because they felt they were victims of cancer and would not survive. But like Chuck, I always had a positive attitude. My surgeon believes that a positive attitude makes a difference in your survival rate.
   Cancer can take an emotional toll on you. Some days you will feel up and that you are going to win the battle. Then on other days, you are depressed and feel it is such a big hill to climb. That’s normal. If your depression lasts more than two or three days, you need to discuss it with your doctors. You may need medication or counseling to help with the stress.
   Medication and professional support like a counselor or a support group led by a professional can help you with your emotions. Once these are in place, you need to create a personal plan and develop daily habits to help you have your absolute best chance at recovery.
   For a greater opportunity for a successful outcome, you must develop the skills to build your Emotional intelligence (known as emotional quotient or EQ). What is EQ? It has nothing to do with the intelligence tests you took in school. Emotional intelligence is the ability to understand, use, and manage your own emotions in positive ways. Developing your emotional intelligence will help you relieve stress and overcome challenges like those you face when you have cancer. It can also help you communicate effectively, relate to other people, and resolve conflicts. It’s critical to winning your battle with cancer and achieving your personal and professional goals. Another benefit of EQ is help with emotional vampires that will appear during your cancer journey. These people quickly turn an inquiry about you or a visit into a conversation that is all about them. They drain your energy. One of the core skills of EQ is self-regulation. When the vampires arrive or people offer unwanted advice, take a deep breath, and think about how you want to manage the conversation. You may need to work on saying no or insisting on changing the conversation. 
   People who have high EQ are self-motivated. If you are a procrastinator, work on taking action and focusing on your long-term goal of not only surviving but thriving. Make lists, give yourself rewards for the activities you accomplish. They don’t have to cost money. Perhaps you allow yourself a relaxing soak in a tub with some soft music in the background. 
   The fourth core skill is empathy. It is the ability to recognize the feelings, wants, and needs of others. It is difficult to focus on others when you are battling cancer. But a moment to hear about their day, their challenges, or a small token of appreciation goes a long way in maintaining the relationship.
    So, build your emotional intelligence (EQ), and you are on your way to the long-term benefits of health, healing, and success.
   You must believe that you will recover. It does not matter what religion you practice or if you believe in the power of the universe or a supportive collection of family and friends as a power greater than you alone. You must have faith and the belief that you can win your battle against cancer.
   There has been a lot written about the power of faith and the belief in a positive outcome. In fact, the Yale University class with the highest enrollment is on positivity and well-being taught by Laurie Santos, Ph.D. It is now offered FREE online at coursera.org. I urge you to take the class online as it is a rewarding experience, and it is FREE! Here are some things from Professor Santos’ course you can start doing today:
* Savor your moments of joy, inspiration, amusement, love, gratitude, and awe.
* Perform random acts of kindness.
* Keep a daily gratitude journal.
* Exercise daily.
* Make one new social connection per day.
* Meditate daily.
* Get 8 hours of sleep.
* Write a gratitude letter to someone and deliver it in person unless impossible due to distance. It is incredibly effective for both people when delivered in person. I did it, and both the recipient and I cried with joy and gratitude.
   Do you want more evidence that it works? Here are some examples. When I was diagnosed with breast cancer, a friend gave me Dr. Bernie Siegel’s book Love, Medicine, and Miracles. In his book, Dr. Siegel talks about extremely ill patients who were not expected to live yet recovered. In her book Dying to Be Me, Anita Moorjani talks about her battle with cancer and how she was given just hours to live, yet she is now fully recovered. Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania continue to conduct research on the impact of faith and a positive attitude on the outcome of illness. So far, the study shows there is a significant positive impact. You can read more about it in The Healing Power of Faith by Dr. Harold G. Koenig M.D.
   Bad things happen to all of us. Some people crumble while others bounce back stronger than ever and with new insights and a sense of purpose. What’s the difference? Scientific studies have found that a positive attitude fuels resilience and builds physical health. When you develop heartfelt positivity, it opens your mind to new and different possibilities. A positive attitude will stop the downward spiral and lead you to higher ground. It will also open your eyes and help you gain an upbeat point of view. The ideal ratio of positive thoughts to negative thoughts is 4 positives to 1 negative. The tipping point and your goals should be 3 positives to 1 negative thought. 
   Meditating, walking in nature, and observing things that bring a feeling of awe can help you bounce back to normal. You can also actively investigate or try something new like art, music, baking, or studying a new language. Try whatever interests you. It will keep your attention off your illness, and you may launch a whole new career. Reduce negativity, stop constantly thinking things over and over. Check the facts and question negative thinking. Become more mindful. It’s a skill. Dr. Rudy Tanzi of Harvard University can help you develop it. He has free and low-cost programs. You can purchase his book Super Brain: Unleashing the Explosive Power of Your Mind to Maximize Health, Happiness, and Spiritual Well-Being from Amazon. It can help you find and eliminate what starts you thinking negatively. You can also learn to deal with negative people by limiting contact with them. Look at the situation in a different way. Perhaps you can show appreciation for their positive attributes and change your view of them. Think where this person offers you a lesson.
   I always take a book with me to appointments. It’s surprising how much you can learn during those usually boring waiting times. Something great I highly recommend reading is Positivity by Barbara Fredrickson, Ph.D. She provides evidence about how a positive attitude changes how your mind works. It increases the range of possibilities you see. Those possibilities have an effect not only on today but also downstream on the course of your life. I love that she explains how to bounce back from challenges and create a new life. There are no straight lines, but she explains that you will reach your destination and be happier despite the twists and turns of your journey.
   Lesson: Stay positive. There is a mind-body connection. You want your brain to send healing messages to your body because it will help you get through the tough times.


Chapter 20: Learning to Ask for Help
Phyllis’ Story

   Asking for help after I was diagnosed with cancer was a real learning experience for me. My father was away in the military for the first three years of my life. When he returned, he insisted I become independent. I was always told to take care of myself and to solve problems on my own. So, when cancer entered my life, I spent the first weeks trying to do everything as usual. Then I watched a Tony Robbins video and had an ah-ha moment. Tony said people want to help. You are cheating them of a positive experience if you deny them the opportunity to help. He said they care about you and want to feel useful. Accepting their offer of help is an act of generosity and compassion.
   If you are independent, it isn’t easy to accept help. You want to keep things as normal as possible. You must put your well-being first. You can share your feelings with your family and friends and then make a plan to gradually accept help with the things you need. You can discuss how you want to retain your power and sense of self-worth as long as possible. But, also, you must remember, your cancer treatment won’t last forever. When your treatment is over, you may have an opportunity to pay your friends and family back. They may not need the same assistance or the same amount of help. You may also have a chance to pay it forward by offering support to someone else facing a difficult time in their life.
   As friends help with tasks, they may not complete them to your standards. Chill out! The most important thing to focus on is the job is done; you can do it your way when you have recovered
   It may be a bit easier if you start by asking a family member in your household to help with tasks you know they can handle. For example, your teenage or adult children might be better at loading the dishwasher or doing their own laundry. In contrast, your spouse may take over some of the cooking and drive you to appointments. As with the family members, prioritize what needs to be done and delegate tasks to those best able to help with that task.
   Many people don’t know what you need. They say, “Let me know if you need anything.” Be prepared to suggest a way they can help and when they can provide this service. If you worry that your friend or family member will feel guilty if they can’t fulfill your request when you need it, you can recommend the free website lotsahelpinghands.com to them. It allows you to list what you need and the days and times something is necessary. It’s safe and private.
   Finally, your helpers appreciate hearing a thank you. You can also express your gratitude by writing thank-you notes during your chemo treatment. It is a productive way to fill the time, and expressing gratitude lifts your spirits.
   Next, you may need some financial help. Not everything is covered by insurance. Some insurance policies have high deductibles that reoccur each year, and some patients do not have insurance. Sometimes, financial assistance is regional and challenging to track down. Be persistent. We have included a resource page at the back of this book. It lists websites and phone numbers of resources for help.
   Finally, you may benefit from some visits with a counselor, minister, or priest. For example, you may have feelings of survivor guilt, weakness, or declining self-worth. You may also want to discuss some activities to help you cope with all the challenges of cancer. Acknowledging you need some visits with a counselor is a sign of personal awareness and strength.
   Lesson: It may not be easy at first, but you will benefit from the help and realize how much your friends and family care about you. When you look back on this time in your life, your heart will be filled with gratitude. In addition, asking for help will benefit your physical and mental well-being.


Chapter 21: Take Baby Steps
Peggie’s Story

Get moving and keep moving. Even if you only walk to the mailbox, get up, get out and try to get some exercise. I am not talking about training for a marathon, though. I know some women who have run all through their treatments, but they were active before being diagnosed with breast cancer. 
   When I realized that “I was going to live through this disease,” I knew that I needed to regain my strength and, in fact, decided that now was the time to finally get into the gym. I know that many of you have had many surgeries, chemotherapy, and radiation which drain your body of energy. Not to mention all the antibiotics, pain medications, etc., that wreak havoc in your body. Laying around all day is not going to help get that stuff out of your system.
   Start with baby steps! 
   On day one, you can look in your closet for your walking shoes. OK, you found them. So, cool beans, you’re done for today.
   Day two, get the shoes out of the closet and try them on. Looking good, girl. Check that one off the list.
   Day three, walk out to the mailbox and back. Remember, breath in, breath out. You are well on your way to better health. I am proud of you.
   When I decided to get into the gym, I was sure I would hurt myself, and I knew that I would not go regularly if I did. So, I kept telling myself to go slow and to count each day that I walked through the door at the gym to be a good day. In the past, I had watched people on the stair machine just working away the pounds and building strength. By the way, I felt after climbing my stairs at home, I knew this machine was one I wanted to conquer. So, with that ‘take it slow’ mentality, I thought setting a goal of two minutes on that machine would work. But, let me tell you that looks can be deceiving. That machine is not as easy as the gym rats made it look. I broke out in a sweat just getting started. So, I made it my goal to put one foot down, then the other.
   I always worked to take one more step than I thought possible. Just one more step. Totally winded, I stopped thinking it was most important not to hurt myself. Excited to see how long I managed to tame the beast. The display read thirty seconds. So, it was not my goal of two minutes, but it was an effort on my part, and that made me proud. Start slow, take baby steps, stick with it, and you will win. Eight months later, I rode my bike seven miles each morning and worked out in the gym for an hour at night. Twenty-five minutes on the stair machine hardly broke a sweat, and that was a giant step for me.
   Lesson: For any type of exercise, start slow but get started. It is a challenge at first, but you will build flexibility and strength. You will be so proud of your accomplishment, and it will contribute to your overall well-being.








Section Three
Surviving to Thriving


Chapter 22: “On a Bad Day, There’s Always Lipstick”
Audrey Hepburn

   There is a great article in Premier Health about looking good during and after treatment. “You may be in the fight of your life, but you don’t have to look like it.” 
   Cancer and its associated treatments can take a toll on you in so many areas, skin, hair, nails, and your emotional well-being. In this chapter, we offer you some basics to help you look better and lift your spirits. To help you quickly find an area of interest, we have divided this chapter into subsections. 
   Among the many questions, the one at the top of the list that women ask once they get a breast cancer diagnosis is, “Will I lose my hair?” For that reason, we dedicated two chapters in this book to your hair and wigs. We also recommend Pretty Sick: The Beauty Guide for Women with Cancer by beauty editor Caitlin Kiernan. Before writing her book, she consulted with hairdressers to the stars and the top people in beauty product companies. 
   We’ll provide some reliable information from a variety of additional sources, including our campers. This chapter is only a start. Use the list in the resources section to dig deeper for more information in your areas of concern.
Skin
   That said, let’s start with skin since it is the largest organ in your body. Not only does the inside of your body take a beating as you fight cancer, so does your skin. It needs your help as it has a lot of jobs to do. First, it must close the incision left by your surgeon and protect you from infection. It must also reduce inflammation and send new cells to knit together the lower layers of your skin. Finally, it needs to create new patterns to strengthen it against stress. So, you want to help it heal and minimize scars as well as prevent infection. 
   While performing these tasks, your skin also has to deal with the impact of chemotherapy, radiation, or both. Those treatments can cause your skin to become dry, itchy, peal, or have acne-like breakouts. It can also develop rashes, hives, blisters, scaly patches, and photosensitivity (reaction to sunlight). So, this is an excellent time to remind you to review your prescriptions with your pharmacist. In addition, you want to identify any medication that can make you photosensitive or any other drug that can interfere with your treatment. Finally, some women also experience other impacts like becoming red from head to toe. That effect is called retro-dermic. 
   Even if you don’t receive chemo or radiation treatments, your skin can look dry and lifeless. So, what can you do? First, you can work with your nutritionist to ensure you get enough Omega3 in your diet or if you need to take a fish oil supplement. It can not only help your skin have a healthier glow, but it can also reduce the risk of depression.
   Next, you can take steps in your daily care to protect and enrich your skin. Multiple sources advise against taking long hot showers. They also don’t recommend a bath because you could be inviting germs or dirt to enter your skin and cause infection. Instead, take a warm shower and don’t linger. If you are receiving radiation therapy, be careful not to scrub away the ink marks until they are no longer needed. When you exit the shower, pat yourself dry rather than rub your skin. 
   Oncodermatology doctors recommend using moisturizing fragrance-free soap or body wash. After your shower, they highly recommend using a thick, rich, unscented moisturizer with ceramides. They are helpful as they restore moisture and plump up your skin. They also form a barrier against bacteria and environmental pollutants. Check the labels as a product marked as organic does not necessarily mean that it is free from ingredients that can worsen your situation. For example, doctors warn against sulfate facial and body cleansers as they can dry and irritate your skin. You can avoid them by checking the label to be sure they are sulfate-free. You can even choose products that are meant for a baby’s sensitive skin.
   It’s helpful to have a dermatologist on your team to help you select products that are right for your skin. First, dermatologists typically recommend a 50 SPF sunscreen and a face moisturizer containing sunscreen. Most people don’t believe how intense the sun’s rays are, even through the tinted windows of their car. Next, your dermatologist will check your lips as they are an early sign of dehydration and vitamin deficiency. Also, be sure to drink enough water (the ounces should equal your weight number divided by two, for example, 124 ÷ 2 = 62 ounces). Finally, use a good conditioning lip balm in a tube, not one of those cute little pots. 
   For women who have lost their hair, don’t forget to apply sunscreen to your scalp and then cover it with a wig, scarf, or hat. It can get a nasty burn if it’s exposed. Here is another tip to help with skin moisture. Buy a humidifier for your bedroom or other areas where you spend a lot of time. You can find inexpensive ones at Walmart, Amazon, Target, or similar retailers. Also, remember to bundle up in the wintertime if you live in a cold-weather area.
   If you are getting radiation treatment, it is essential to know how it will affect you. Radiation passes through your skin to reach cancer. As your treatment continues, it can burn your skin. The degree of impact depends on your skin and the number of treatments you receive. Light skin women appear burned, while black and brown women can develop tan or black spots on their skin. Dermatologists recommend using a hydrocortisone steroid cream before the treatment to prepare your skin. Your dermatologist can advise which type is best for you. Once a burn appears, your doctor will prescribe a medication, or you can use a diaper rash cream made with zinc oxide.
   To feel comfortable during treatment, avoid tight-fitting clothes and bras with underwires. Keep the area clean and dry. It goes without saying, allow the skin to grow back naturally. Doctors warn you not to pick or lift the scabs because doing that can invite infection. While we are discussing clean, remember to use only fragrance-free laundry detergent and fabric softeners. 
Oral Health - Teeth and Gums
   Researchers of the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research recommend visiting your dentist one month before starting cancer treatment. Make sure you share your dentist’s name with your cancer team and vice versa. Regular brushing, cleaning, and swishing with mouthwash helps you support a healthy smile. Cancer treatments can cause dry mouth, mouth sores, infection, bone disease, gum disease, and difficulty swallowing. You may also experience burning, peeling, or swelling of your tongue. Your doctor or dentist can prescribe medication to reduce the impact of these side effects. 
   When patients have blisters, open sores, or infections, spicy, acidic, and sharp food are definitely out. If they don't have oral issues, spicy foods help override the metallic taste in their mouths. Dentists will also advise you to prevent tooth decay, so control your sugar intake as decay-causing bacteria live on it. 
Nails
   A manicure, pedicure, or your regular waxing appointment can feel so refreshing. Just understand it may not be approved by your team. That’s because some cancer treatments affect the nails at the bed or cause nail discoloration. They may also be dry, develop ridges, or yikes even fall off! So, your doctor may want you just to do a “home school job.” He may recommend only clear nail polish and non-acetone polish remover. Whether you have a professional or a “home school job,” it is a good idea to keep them short, so they don’t catch on to things. It also prevents splits and tears, which can cause bacteria to be trapped and cause infection. 
   Premier Health reports that nail health is a crucial way to prevent lymphedema. Among issues associated with lymphedema is an infection that can enter your body through the nail bed. As you can see from what you have read so far, preventing infection is critical. 
   In addition, doctors recommend wearing household vinyl or rubber gloves when cleaning to avoid exposing your hands and nails to cleaning chemicals. It is a good idea to wear them even when you are not under treatment. Never fear; you can eventually schedule a relaxing spa day with full treatments about two months after your cancer treatment ends. Also, don’t forget to use care when working outdoors. Protect yourself with bug spray and garden gloves
Shaving Your Arms and Legs
   Many doctors recommend shaving with an electric razor to avoid nicks and cuts that can lead to infection. Suppose you don’t have one. In that case, you can buy an inexpensive one designed especially for the shape of women’s underarms and legs. As of this writing, you can find one for $30 or less at Amazon, Walmart, Bed Bath & Beyond, and Target. 
Breast Appearance Choices
   Whether you have had a lumpectomy or mastectomy, you have choices about your post-surgery appearance. How you view yourself and the image you project to other people is a personal choice.
   If you have had a lumpectomy, the lump may have been small. Once the incision heals, you may not notice a difference in one breast from the other. Some women may have a wrinkle or what looks like a dent in their breast. Other women experience a noticeable difference when they go through menopause. In those cases, some women choose to have an implant inserted to give their breast a more natural look. Other women decide to buy a prosthetic to add to their natural breast.
   Suppose you had a mastectomy and chose reconstruction. In that case, you need to discuss which of several options is best suited to your body, type of mastectomy, cancer treatment, and your mindset. Below are the three major types:
A. A Saline or Silicone Implant: Saline implants are filled with sterile salt water (saline). Silicone implants are silicone shells filled with silicone and come in a textured or smooth surface. The advantage is a soft natural feel. There are a variety of sizes and shapes to fit the different body types. 
B. A Flap Surgery: It takes skin and fat from other body areas, such as your buttock, tummy, or back to form a breast.
C. A Breast Reduction to the Opposite Breast: This procedure may be done with either of the above options. Alternatively, it may be performed for balance if a lumpectomy creates a difference in breast size. 
   Living Through Breast Cancer by Carolyn M. Kaelin, M.D., M.P.H., provides an excellent description of each procedure along with photos and pros and cons of each choice. 
   Suppose you don’t choose reconstruction but want balance or the look of natural breasts. In that case, you can buy prosthetics, shapers, swim forms, and bras designed to create the look you want. Some cancer centers have shops in their location with women trained to make recommendations and fit you with items suited to your needs. If your treatment center doesn’t have a shop, you live in a remote area, or you choose to shop online, you can visit websites, such as mastectomyshop.com or nearlyou.com. If you shop online, choose a shop that can help you select the right prosthetic for you. We make this recommendation because they come in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, and materials. Some prosthetics slide into a pocket in a specially designed bra, while others have adhesive to attach to your skin. We’ve also seen some that connect with a magnet. If you choose the type with adhesive or a magnet, you won’t need special bras. 
   You also have a FREE alternative. Knittedknockers.org supplies knitted prosthetics without charge. As of this publication, over 301,000 women have chosen these handmade breast forms over the other options. The benefits are no cost, lightweight, no sweat, comfort, and no special bras. In addition, women report that they look and feel like a natural breast when inserted into a bra.
   Review the alternatives and select the option that best fits you.
Makeup
   During cancer treatment, you can feel pretty crummy. A little makeup can do wonders for your mood as well as your looks. Since your skin may be affected by your treatment, there are hypoallergenic products and products for sensitive skin. To help you brighten your appearance and your day, we have gathered some great hints and tips from multiple makeup experts. Some days you may only feel up to washing your face and adding a little lipstick. If you have the energy or are heading to work during treatment, you will want to do more. Yet, remember the words of television makeup artist Diane Heller, “Less is more. You don’t want to look like you are ready for the Broadway stage or a Japanese Kabuki performance.” Instead, you want to look fresh and like yourself.
   So, begin with fresh, clean skin. Then, apply a moisturizer that includes a good sunblock.
   You may find that your skin changes color or looks sallow as an effect of both cancer and your treatment. You may also develop redness and hyperpigmentation (areas of the skin that are darker than the surrounding skin), but that’s easy to fix with a color corrector. At first, our suggestion may sound crazy but trust us. All the major makeup companies list this advice on their website. Think of the color wheel in the paint store. Then use the opposite color of the one you are trying to correct. For example, if your skin is red or has blemish marks, use a green color corrector. Peach or orange will do wonders for those dark circles under your eyes. You can brighten your sallow skin with a lilac corrector. If you want to cancel purple and even out your skin tone, use a yellow corrector. Also, if you have sunspots or your skin develops dark spots, use the yellow corrector. You can find inexpensive brands at Walmart and Target as well as your local makeup or department store. At the time of this writing, a kit with all six basic correcting colors was available online for $12. A little bit of this will do wonders for smoothing out your skin color.
   Next, you will want a primer. Our experts recommend a silicone-based primer. It will hydrate your skin and keep your makeup looking fresh longer. It also hides those fine lines and blurs visible pores. Next, you’ll find that makeup artists like Diane recommend a liquid or spray. It’s also available as a cream. They, too, are available at various prices, from drug stores to makeup specialty shops. We suggest not buying the high-end products at this time as your color may change, or you may have a reaction to a product. We found some available as low as $6.
   Ah, now we are ready for the foundation. The products come in various forms, stick, liquid, cream, or mouse. We found many different suggestions for matching the color to your skin. It may be a challenge at this time as your skin can appear to be of different skin colors on different days or at different times during your treatment. The best suggestion we found in several places is to match the color to the skin on the side of your face where your cheek and eye meet, but not your under-eye. That area may have dark circles that need the peach or orange color correction. If this is getting to feel a bit much for you, try a B.B. cream (beauty balm cream). It is a foundation that moisturizes and contains pigmentation to even out your skin tone. We found some with 5-star ratings online for $7.99 and up. Most had an SPF of 30 to 50.
   To finish the job, use some pressed powder to help make it last. You can also add some illuminator or bronzer. Diane says it gives you a healthier look. There are other organic products that you can mix with your moisturizer. Again, these products are available in a range of prices from $3.99 up. Once you put all this effort into looking good, you want it to stay looking good as long as possible during the day or evening. 
   No, we didn’t forget your eyes. During treatment, you may experience one of two situations. You may have thinning or no eyebrows and eyelashes. Let’s work on those eyebrows first and then move to the eyelashes.
   This great tip is from an article Skincare and Makeup Tips During Cancer Treatment on waroncancer.com. If you haven’t lost your eyebrows but may lose them due to your cancer treatment, take a photo of the way they were before treatment for a reference. It will help you create brows that look close to the way they looked before treatment.
   You can follow the directions online from any makeup company to draw or fill in your eyebrows with a pencil, pomade, or sculpting kit. Start with a taupe pencil or kit. Then draw using a pencil with hair-like strokes. Some companies offer eyebrow mascara. For example, Flower cosmetics currently has a liquid with fibers that you apply with a small brush. You can also use brow wax to create a base and then use eyebrow powder. The wax will also keep your brows from smearing or melting.
   If you have lost your eyebrows, you can create them with the previously mentioned tools. On the other hand, you can buy artificial eyebrows from the shop in your cancer treatment center or online. They look real and even raise like natural eyebrows. To attach them to your skin, you use a light application of special glue. If you choose these eyebrows, test the adhesive on a small area of your skin first. Although it is generally made to be hypoallergenic, your treatment may make your skin more sensitive. 
   The same is true for your eyelashes. Mascara can help your eyelashes look fuller and darker. If you have lost them, never fear. False eyelashes are readily available online and in the shops. There are even some available that are waterproof. That is great news if you can go in a pool or get heat flashes and perspire. If you do wear mascara, be sure to use an eye makeup remover. Repetitive rubbing can break your skin barrier and increase irritation. Also, it can cause tiny blood vessels to form. Some dermatologists recommend using a cotton pad with your remover and leaving it on for thirty seconds. Then, gently wipe it off. You can use a cotton swab to remove any little mascara left. Then wash your face.
   Here is a note from the experts on both the eyebrows and eyelashes. During and shortly after treatment, choose a color slightly lighter than you would typically choose. For example, if you want to add eyeliner, choose a brown earth tone rather than black.
   If you use eyeliner, Diane suggests using organic or vegan brown eye shadow for a softer look. Wet it with an eyeliner brush and then apply. You can use liquid, gel, or pencil if you prefer that form. 
   A warning!!! Experts warn not to get your eyebrows tattooed during treatment. Your eyebrows and eyelashes will grow back. In addition, you may not be happy with the color when your hair grows back, and the combination of tattoos and natural brows may not be attractive.
   Diane suggested using lip balm rather than lipstick because they contain lots of moisture. Look for brands that are organic and silicone-free. There are also moisture-rich brands especially made for cancer patients. Type headcovers.com/beauty/ into your web browser for a company that offers cosmetics and instructions for application.
   For those rosy cheeks, she recommends a cream. It is easy to apply to your cheekbones and easily blends with your foundation makeup. Choose a color based on your skin tone. Women with fair skin look best with light pinks and peach. If your skin is a medium tone, try a mauve or dark peach. If you have dark skin, you will look best with dark colors, such as red, fuchsia, berry, or plum.
   Although the F.D.A. doesn’t require makeup companies to list an expiration date on makeup products, they can still go bad. So, refresh your makeup with the change of season or at least twice a year. Sometimes, they even go dry, or they get a funny smell. So, if it does, throw it out. It is not worth the risk of infection to save a few dollars on makeup. Also, remember to wash your hands before applying makeup as they can transfer germs from people and surfaces you have touched.
   As of this writing, there are Look Good Feel Better online workshops at lookgoodfeelbetter.org/virtual-workshops. They give valuable information on skincare, makeup, wigs, and other head coverings, body image, and styling. They also help women manage their concerns and connect with other women undergoing cancer treatment. 
Clothes/What to Wear
   The purpose of post-surgery clothing is to be comfortable while looking good or perhaps even fashionable. The clothes fit into several categories: first days or weeks after surgery, during treatment, and post-treatment recovery. Let’s talk about each group in the order you will need them.
   First, go shopping before your surgery. It is a good idea to buy a light to mid-weight wrap-around robe with a belt. Many women said a heavy robe was uncomfortable, especially when you have drains and bandages and feel exhausted. Next, don’t forget to buy some moccasin or bootie-style slippers if you don’t have any at home. Your clog or slip-on style slippers will be unsafe, especially if you plan to have multi-step reconstruction or are on painkillers. Finally, you might want to buy a comfy blanket or a hoodie Sherpa/wearable blanket for winter lounging and chemo treatments.
   During treatment, comfort is a must. You can graduate to spandex leggings as you gain the strength to pull them on. You will want to wear your button-up the front shirt to your chemo treatment. Short or three-quarter sleeves are also easier to manage on those days. There are shirts specifically designed for access to your port, PICC line, or veins for testing. If you or a friend sew, you can easily convert a regular blouse into an accessible one for treatment. You can also sew or buy attractive PICC line covers. Finally, we noticed that kimono tops are an attractive alternative for treatment days. In the fall and winter, it is easy to stay warm with a colorful poncho, shawl, cape, or wrap.
   You may gain or lose weight during treatment. So, buy a few new outfits as your size changes. Put the old clothes that don’t fit right now into the back of the closet or in plastic storage boxes under the bed. You can begin to revisit them two or three months after you have finished your treatment. If you buy some trendy clothes that fit, it will help to cheer you up. You may need to modify your style while your reconstruction is in process or if you decide to become a flattie. If you gain weight, style consultants suggested choosing loose, unconstructed clothes instead of tailored outfits. They also recommend wearing V-necks if you are puffy and round necks if you have lost weight and look tired.
   Protect your skin by wearing long-sleeved dresses, shirts, and long pants. Your skin will be sensitive, so protect your head with hats and scarves. You can choose a baseball hat, a turban, scarf, or a 1920’s style cloche hat. Beware those lightweight hats that the sun shines through the weave; they won’t protect your head from the sun’s damaging rays. Instead, you can find protective summer hats that are U.P.F. 50 certified.
   If your treatment sends you into menopause, you may have hot flashes. Choose lightweight fabrics that absorb or draw the moisture away from your skin. They will keep you cool, and you will feel more comfortable. Jersey and cotton jersey fabrics are better than 100% cotton. Cotton will absorb and hold the dampness, making you feel uncomfortable. You’ll find yoga tops are comfortable because their fabrics are designed to absorb and draw away moisture. Clothes made of bamboo or anti-flushing material are excellent choices. Finally, to hide moisture stains, choose outfits in prints or bright colors rather than light colors.
   Lesson: This Malay Proverb is perfect for this section: “Prepare the umbrella before it rains.” It gives you permission to go shopping and get the things you need to look good and feel better before starting treatment.

Chapter 23: It’s All About Your Hair

   Chemotherapy profoundly affects the self-image, emotional state, and physical appearance of many women receiving this treatment. If your doctor prescribes a chemotherapy regimen, how much hair you lose depends on the type of chemo prescribed. Some people experience total hair loss. Yikes! That’s right. You may lose every hair down to your eyelashes, eyebrows, and even your nose hairs. On the other hand, your treatment may cause you only to experience hair thinning or no change at all. You will know what to expect if you talk to your doctor about the type of medications you will be taking. 
   OK, now that you know what to expect, what can you do to take charge and help yourself both mentally and physically?
   One of the first things you want to do is plan a wig shopping day with a family member or your best friend. It is easier to match your existing hair color, texture, and style before starting the treatment than after you begin. Next, you want to search for the right wig at a shop that carries wigs for cancer patients. Traditional wigs have combs to hold the wig in place. Wigs designed for cancer patients do not have combs as they are not needed. They also have softer fabric inside as the scalp may be sensitive or even have a rash.
   A survivor, Pam, cut her long hair shorter. She felt it would lessen the shock when her hair started to fall out. Other patients agreed this was a good idea.
   Personally, we don’t suggest shaving your head unless you start to see rapid hair loss. After all, you might not be that person who loses all their hair.
   Stylists recommend these tips to protect your hair and avoid any unnecessary stress on it:
* Avoid things like curlers, hairdryers, wearing ponytails, clips, bobby pins, and hair spray. They prohibit curling irons, electric rollers, and straightening irons too. They are all hard on your hair, even when you are not on chemo.
* Use baby shampoo as it is very gentle.
* When towel drying your hair, gently pat it with a soft towel.
* When styling your hair, Stylists recommends a wide-tooth comb or soft bristle brush.
* Although you may want to get back to your pre-cancer look, both doctors and stylists strongly urge you not to use hair dyes or perm solutions. They can counteract the chemo or the medications you are taking. The American Cancer Society also says that research shows the chemicals in hair dye may cause severe irritation to your skin.
* Use a good cream rinse and put the blow dryer on a low setting while your hair is growing back.
* Sleeping on a satin pillow will not only help maintain your style, but it is also gentle on your hair and scalp.
* When it is cold outside, maintain your head and body heat with scarves and warm hats. In addition, a colorful beanie, a turban, a newsboy cap, a 1920’s cloche hat, or a slouchy snood hat give you a creative new look.
* If you go outside without a head covering, make sure you take time to apply sunscreen to protect your scalp from the sun.
   While your hair will grow back after treatment, hair loss is devastating for many women receiving chemotherapy. Some hospitals and chemotherapy centers are now offering cold cap therapy to reduce the impact. This therapy was cleared by the FDA in 2015. In addition to hospitals and treatment center availability, the caps can also be purchased online. The objective of this therapy is to lower the temperature of the scalp to constrict the cells. Then it will be more difficult for the chemo drugs to enter the cells. The cooler temperature also reduces the cell activity, thus making it less of a target for the drugs. According to a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association, 66% of the women using the cold caps saw a 50% reduction in hair loss.
   There are two types of caps. One kind is stored in a freezer at a very low temperature until it is time for your use; the other is connected to a cooling system. This therapy may be an option you want to consider. First, we suggest checking with your oncologist for the details related to your treatment. The cap type and time recommended are connected to your therapy. You may need to wear your cap from 30 to 50 minutes before your infusion. Then wear it during and up to 5 hours after your treatment. You may find this requirement an added discomfort. Also, check with your insurance company. The therapy may not be covered, and it could be beyond your budget. 
   Your oncologist will decide the proper regimen for your specific case. Chemo usually consists of a treatment cycle every two or three weeks for six or eight weeks. So that means your chemo treatment will last about four to six months. Once your treatments have ended, your hair will start to grow back, usually in a couple of weeks.
   When your hair grows back, it’s often different than the hair you lost. Your new hair may be a different color and texture. Phyllis often teases her friend Doug who donated blood to her. She had curly brown hair with red highlights before her surgery. When her hair grew back, it was salt and pepper gray like Doug’s hair. She tells him it is all his fault that she now colors her hair. Your hair may come back curly when the hair you lost was straight. You may have areas that grow back slower or not at all. Cynthia developed small bald patches, a condition called alopecia. If you notice small bald spots, you can apply minoxidil (the active formula in Rogaine) after you complete treatment. It may help speed the hair regrowth. 
   We know you may be eager to return to your previous look, but do not use chemical products on your new hair growth until you talk with your health care provider. While your hair is growing back, your scalp may develop a sensitivity. So, it’s a good time to wear scarves and hats rather than your wig. 
   Remember we said you lose not only the hair on your head but other body hair as well. So, we were delighted to find that websites like headcovers.com sell human hair and temporary tattoo eyebrows. They also sell false eyelashes.
   Lesson: The main thing to keep in mind is that the job of chemotherapy is to chase down and kill the fastest replicating cells in the body, the cancer cells. Your hair loss should be your outward sign that the chemo is doing its job. Remember, it is temporary; so, smile.


Chapter 24: Wig-Out
Peggie’s Story

   Recently, I had lunch with my friend Ashley. When I approached the table, I saw that Ashley had on a beautiful long wig to cover the ravages of the chemo that she was undergoing for breast cancer. It cracked me up because I did not recognize her, and I knew what a self-assured and confident young woman she was. So, I just could not resist asking, “So what’s up with the wig?” I knew she rarely wore one. She often tied on a bandana and went wherever she was going without a second thought.
   Her reply took me by surprise. She said, “I wear it to make other people comfortable. When I am out at the mall, it makes other people uncomfortable to see a 31-year-old woman walking around with no hair. When I put on a wig, they have no idea that I have cancer.” That was an extremely powerful statement. A true statement. Why do people stare at bald women? Because it strikes a chord in them, the thought, “Oh my God, if she could get cancer, so could I or my mother or my girlfriend or my best friend.” Most people have no idea of the mysterious world of cancer; they only know you can die from it. 
   But, when your hair is falling out, it tells you that the chemo is doing its job. So, it isn’t mysterious at all.
   OK, back to our discussion on wigs. Years ago, when I first started hosting overnight camps for women with cancer, I was surprised at how many women arrived at camp for the first time proudly wearing their wigs. One of my favorite stories from that time is about a woman in the dining hall one particularly warm night, as Florida summer nights get. She was itching her head up a storm, and sweat was pouring down her face as she flushed with a hot flash. The women at the table, all strangers, said to her in the most loving way, “Why don’t you take that wig off? You won’t scare us; we have all been bald.” With that, the woman removed her wig and spent the entire weekend going bare-headed. When Sunday came around, I saw her sitting on one of the benches crying, and I walked over to her and knelt in front of her, asking what could possibly be wrong. Through her sobs, she said, “To spend a weekend with all these other ladies showed me that I am not alone. When I feel sorry for myself, I will think of some of the others I have met here and thank God that I don’t have it so bad. Here I feel so normal walking around just as I am even though I am bald. I just can’t seem to put this wig on and walk back out there.” My question to her was, “Why do you have to put the wig back on at all?”
   Then there were the black women searching for wigs but could not find anything that worked for them. Yes, there were wigs for black women who had not lost their hair and wanted another look. But none were available that fit the needs of black women in treatment. So why don’t the typical wigs worn by black women work for them? The standard wigs contain combs to hold the wig to the existing hair. Since there is little or no hair during treatment, the combs can only scratch and irritate the scalp. Remove the combs, and the wigs are loose. In addition, the available wigs made for those in treatment did not look like their natural coils. So, two breast cancer survivors have each decided to create a line of wigs especially designed for black cancer patients. Michel Sproules, the wife of NFL football champion Darren Sproules, opened her store Pink Hair Line in San Diego. And Dianne Austin offers her wigs in hospital boutiques and online at coilstolocs.com.
   Lesson: You are not alone. Be strong and be yourself. It helps to be in a community of others facing the same challenges. It can be a camp, a retreat, a support group, or just a get-together like those at Gilda’s Club. Find one of these groups near you. It will provide hope and support.


Chapter 25: Did Your Caregiver Turn into a Vulture? 
Peggie’s Story

   I can remember one of my favorite notes left on my desk. It read: “Peggie, call Jane. She is going to kill her husband, and she wants you to come over and help her bury the body!” All righty, now. Think I might return that call first.
   During cancer, treatment emotions run the gamut. There is great fear because there is a loss of power, weakness, drug side effects, and emotional highs and lows. No matter how wonderful and loving your caretakers are, there will be days that the frustration of dealing with this disease will come to a head. Some days you feel like you are in a deep, dark hole, and no one understands that you are all alone. You think no one has ever walked the same path you’re on. I’ve got a secret for you: all of us feel that way during treatment. A good night’s sleep will often help, but call your doctor if you feel like that for more than three days in a row. Most cancer patients are on some type of medication to help with depression. It is OK to ask for something; honestly, it is. Don’t suffer through it when you don’t need to.
   One of my frustrations during my journey came from the fact that I could not do anything for myself. My darling and patient husband would shave my underarms, lift the toilet seat cover, adjust the shower, get food out of the microwave, open the car door, pull my seatbelt across me, carry my purse, and on and on. In the beginning, I couldn’t get out of bed without my husband lifting me up. All of this was very hard for me to deal with because I am usually a powerful independent woman who has run my own business for years. To accept this much-needed help was humiliating, very humbling, and I struggled with it. When I started to get better, I wanted nothing more than to reclaim my power. But right there was my loving husband, always ready to spring into action. I used to joke that he was like a vulture sitting on my shoulder all the time, just waiting to pounce. He really didn’t like me saying that, and I can understand his hovering. He was just trying to do everything he could to make me feel better and help me heal.
   Often, the people who end up in the caretaker role nervously hover about because they don’t want us to hurt ourselves. We have to thank them for that, but they also need to understand that we want to start doing things for ourselves as soon as possible because we want to be normal again. Reclaiming our power, even in small steps, is essential for our mental well-being. Just like we get good at being cancer patients, our caretakers get good at being right there to help. Sometimes, they don’t realize that they are hovering. So, kindly let them know they need to let you regain your power. Do not wait until you are ready to lash out at them to say something. Sometimes, you need to tell them that you are getting better and need to start doing things for yourself again to feel like you have some control over the situation. Don’t be in too much of a hurry, or you will just set yourself back. Take the time to heal, and before long, you will be up and running and doing well. I promise.
   Lesson: Accept help when you need it, but talk kindly with caregivers about taking back your power. The balance of accepting help and reclaiming power is critical to recovering your physical strength and your overall well-being. It is also helpful for your caregiver and your long-term relationship.


Chapter 26: Complementary and Integrative Therapies

   We found this an exciting and important chapter to write. So often, when patients are diagnosed with a life-threatening illness like cancer, they look for a magic bullet. Unfortunately, there is no magic bullet. And many doctors, including the former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, M.D. state that some alternative medicines can cause serious problems. They do approve of complementary and integrative therapies to lessen the pain and challenges of cancer.
   Before we talk about the various therapies, let’s clarify the difference between alternative medicine and complementary and integrative therapies. Alternative medicine is the use of treatments outside the mainstream options. They don’t have rigorous scientific testing to prove they are effective, ineffective, or even harmful. Medical providers recommend complementary and integrative therapies in addition to standard treatments. There are various degrees of effectiveness and therapies to relieve different symptoms.
   Now, let’s get to the complementary or integrative therapies, what they are and how they can help you feel better. 

Acupressure
   It is a treatment that has been used in Chinese medicine for many centuries. You or a practitioner can apply pressure to targeted pressure points in your body. Many women like this treatment because you can learn to apply it yourself. There are several forms of acupressure. Studies found focusing on the pressure points that encourage relaxation is the most effective form.
   Chronic fatigue is an underappreciated side effect, and it can significantly affect your quality of life. In fact, many women suffer from it up to ten years after their treatment ends. Acupressure can reduce fatigue, relieve pain, and improve your quality of life. In addition, you may also notice an improvement in your battle with insomnia or depression. You can find multiple websites, YouTube videos, or schedule a session with a practitioner to learn how and where to apply the pressure.
Acupuncture
   Like acupressure, acupuncture has been used in Chinese medicine for centuries. It isn’t painful. The needles the practitioner uses are very thin. They are not like the needles used for injections or lab tests. How does it work? The practitioner inserts the needles and then activates them with gentle, specific movements. The Chinese believe the body has 2,000 acupuncture points. Stimulated pathways connect these points and create an energy flow called chi through your body. If the flow of your chi is disrupted, the Chinese believe it can cause illness. Phyllis had multiple surgeries for her breast cancer and suffered from nerve pain for years. No medication was effective. Finally, her family doctor added an acupuncturist to her practice and prescribed sessions for her. In two sessions, the pain was gone. Now, she goes quarterly to keep the chi flowing and the nerve pain at bay.
Aromatherapy
   Essential oils have been used for healing and well-being for over 6,000 years. The oils are either inhaled or applied to your skin. Practitioners who use essential oils warn you never to apply them directly in full strength. Instead, a few drops are mixed with a carrier oil, such as almond oil or olive oil. A massage with essential oil will increase your circulation and can help relieve pain. Many people buy a diffuser and add a few drops to the water for a lovely mist. Inhaling the air mixed with the spray can stimulate the part of your brain connected to smell. It can also disinfect your respiratory system, act as a decongestant, and provide psychological benefits. Lavender is a popular scent for its relaxation and sleep-producing qualities. You will find peppermint oil in a diffuser is good for relieving nausea.
   
Art Therapy
   Art therapy is remarkably effective for breast cancer patients. It is beneficial for mental and motor skills as well as fostering self-esteem and self-awareness. You don’t have to be an artist or need to be born with artistic talent. Art allows you to express yourself without using words. It connects your mind, body, and spirit in ways that verbal communication can’t describe. It’s helpful for anyone dealing with physical and emotional challenges in their life. There are adult coloring books with various themes, and there are workshops specifically for breast cancer patients. You can learn about many different types of art projects that will benefit you. Check with the social worker or patient navigator for a workshop in your area.
Biofeedback Treatments
   Biofeedback is a treatment method that teaches you to control body functions, such as heart rate or muscle movement. It is based on the idea of mind over matter. With its techniques, you can change your health by being aware of your body’s response to stress or other stimuli.
   In one type of biofeedback session, the therapist connects you to sensors connected to a computer. The computer screen displays graphics and signals. How does it work for you? For example, a session can help you learn to relax a specific muscle to reduce your pain. It can also reduce stress by helping you pace your breathing, relax your muscles, and think positive statements about your power to deal with cancer. As a result, you will feel calm and have a sense of well-being after a biofeedback session.
   Another biofeedback technique includes a headband that monitors your brain activity while you meditate. Then it sends signals to a computer that tracks your calmness or stress level. Finally, the therapist uses the computer to check your progress. Both types of biofeedback have proven beneficial to breast cancer patients. 
Cannabinoids
   Cannabinoids are plants from which hemp and marijuana are produced. There are two primary forms of cannabinoids: THC, which creates a high, and CBD, which does not. They are also available in a combination of both forms. Neither form is a cure or treatment for cancer. In recent years, marijuana has been used to treat breast cancer symptoms and the side effects of treatment. For example, it can treat nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, pain, anxiety, stress, and insomnia.
   Because marijuana is illegal under federal law, it is difficult to conduct studies to confirm its benefits. One survey reported 75% of patients found it effectively relieved their symptoms. It is legal in many states; so, doctors can write a recommendation for you. The prescription is not filled in pharmacies. As of 2020, the products are sold in state-regulated medical cannabis dispensaries. You can be sure the product is safe by asking for a certificate that states the product is free from harmful things like mold, pesticides, and heavy metals.
   It is also essential to talk to all doctors prescribing medications for you. They may want to recommend one of several forms of the product as well as the potency. If you are in a clinical trial, your doctor is required to report the research drug’s effectiveness and any adverse effects. Therefore, the pharmaceutical company may rule you out of the trial if you use a cannabinoid as its interaction with a drug in research is unknown.
   In addition, patients with certain other medical conditions should avoid cannabis. For example, some doctors warn against it if you have had a heart attack in the last six months, have significant heart disease, take blood thinners, or use immunotherapy. Available information also states it can raise or lower your blood pressure.
   On a positive note, medical marijuana in combination with FDA-approved prescription drugs may reduce the number of medications patients suffering from metastatic breast cancer take for the side effects. But, cancer medications and therapies can interact with each other and with cannabinoids. As a result, they may cause no effect, a beneficial effect, or a harmful effect.
   So, if you live in a state where medical marijuana is legal and want more information, make an appointment with a doctor who participates in your state’s program. The program trains and certifies doctors to qualify you for medical cannabis and monitor your care. Some states also certify trained nurses, physician’s assistants, and pharmacists to qualify patients for medical cannabis.
   Finance may be a concern as insurance, Medicare, or Medicaid do not cover medical cannabinoids. So, they can be expensive. The cost depends upon the form and how much you need. It can start at around $50 per month, and the dispensaries demand cash payment. You also have to consider the cost of getting a marijuana certification card. The price depends upon where you live and can vary from $50 to $500 or more. Some patients have reported the cost of obtaining a card as high as $900. You can buy CBD products with your credit card, and you don’t need a doctor’s recommendation. Remember, you still need to alert your doctor. When purchasing CBD products, you will want to use a company that tests each batch to verify its ingredients. Two of the most reputable companies are Charlotte’s Web and Lazarus Naturals (Lazarus offers discounts for Military Veterans).
   Check with the human resources department to find out about your company’s policy before you decide to use a cannabinoid. You don’t want to risk losing your job and your medical insurance. Remember, cannabinoids are considered illegal under federal law. So, you could face disciplinary action or even lose your job for using it in any form in some companies. For example, government workers, teachers, bus drivers, corrections officers, and employees of companies receiving federal grants or funding are at risk. Even using CBD if it contains a trace of THC is usually forbidden in these companies. Also, many jobs like a bus driver require a regular drug test, so don’t risk it until you check it out.
   For all of the reasons we mentioned, speak with your doctor before using any form of cannabinoids.
Counseling/Health Coach
   Although the goal of an emotional counselor and a health coach is to improve your well-being, there are differences in approach. Breast cancer patients usually search for counseling to deal with short-term present-day circumstances. This is different from people who deal with long-term counseling for past issues, PTSD, trauma, or mental illness. Counselors can help you deal with cancer’s mental and emotional impacts, such as anxiety, depression, and feelings of being overwhelmed. Our campers tell us it is comforting to have the listening ear of a trained, non-judgmental support person. A therapist who has experience working with breast cancer patients can ask you the right questions to help you think through the tough decisions you must make. Check with your insurance company to find out about your coverage.
   A health coach takes a whole person approach with different goals from those set by a counselor. You and the coach work together to achieve mind-body wellness. The counseling is focused on making food and lifestyle changes. Health coaches believe that you are the expert on your mind and body. So, you’re in charge of deciding the goals of your work together. The health coach determines your strengths, weaknesses, and blind spots so you can make healthy lifestyle changes. They also use positive psychology and track your progress toward your goals. While they provide support, they also hold you accountable to do the things you agree to do.
Drum Therapy
   According to Gary Diggins, an Ontario sound therapist, “We moderns are the last people on the planet to uncover what older cultures have known for thousands of years: the act of drumming contains a therapeutic potential to relax the tense, energize the tired, and soothe the emotionally wounded.”
   How does it work? We can give an example from our drum therapy sessions at Faces of Courage cancer camp. The facilitator arrives with a collection of drums and distributes them to the participants sitting in a circle. She then teaches the group how to drum along with her. She will stop and help anyone new to the program until they get the hang of it. We play different rhythms from a variety of cultures. Finally, she gets everyone not only drumming but also handclapping and vocalizing an array of sounds. It is wonderful to see the level of participation and mood changes.
   Drum therapy helps people release emotions. Research has even found that it increases the body’s production of cancer-killing T-cells. In addition, it decreases stress and can change the genomic stress marker. At camp, it helped us develop a feeling of belonging to the group and encouraged sharing. You can go online to find a drum therapy group near you. If you are confined at home, you can find and benefit from an online therapy group.
Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT)
   Like several other alternative therapies, The Emotional Freedom Technique is a treatment method that uses your fingertips to stimulate energy points on your body. You can learn to apply this therapy yourself using the EFT Handbook by Gary Craig. There are also many free tapping classes available on YouTube.
   The treatment has its roots in other ancient techniques that believe in the flow of energy in the body. At the time we are writing this book, its effectiveness is still being researched. The people using this therapy believe it is helpful with anxiety and PTSD.
Equestrian
   Equestrian or equine (horse) therapy dates back to the time of the Greeks. This treatment grew from organizations that worked to make horseback riding available for people with disabilities. The organizations have found that horses have a natural ability to sense human emotions and needs. So, working with them has meaningful mental and emotional benefits. In therapy sessions, a therapist and a trainer skilled in applying it work together with you. During the sessions, patients bond with the horse and develop self-awareness. These sessions often result in healing.
   This therapy is not for everyone because some people have allergies to the horse, barn dust, or hay. Not all horse therapy includes riding a horse. You can begin by petting, grooming, and feeding a horse. Just working with a horse can be comforting and a good distraction from your worries or pain. You can view many videos on YouTube that discuss the value of equestrian therapy. If you are interested in the program, you can search online for one near you.
Guided Visualization
   Guided visualization or guided imagery is a centuries-old therapy where you relax and imagine sights, sounds, smells, or even tastes. It reduces anxiety and helps promote healing. You can work with a practitioner in person or use telemedicine. You can also buy CDs developed specifically for breast cancer patients. Studies found it helpful to breast cancer patients suffering from chemo-brain, fatigue, anxiety, depression, and physical discomfort. Patients receiving chemotherapy who used guided imagery and progressive muscle relaxation had relief from many side effects, including pain, nausea, dry heaving, and vomiting. It also improved their mood and reduced their anxiety and depression. Livestrong.org and Memorial Sloan Kettering hospital are reliable sources of information on this therapy.
Hypnosis
   Hypnosis is not a trick or game. It is serious therapy and has helped many patients deal with the side effects of cancer. There are many definitions of hypnosis. How does it work? Here are the basics from the National Institutes of Health. The hypnotist introduces you to hypnosis, answers your questions, and provides information to discredit myths and put you at ease. For example, one myth is that hypnosis can cause you to do things you wouldn’t normally do. That is NOT true. Once past the myths and questions, the hypnotist guides you through calm and relaxing imagery. Next is step three, the deepening process, in which you become more deeply relaxed and more hypnotized. Now you are ready for suggestions to relieve side effects, such as post-surgical pain, nausea, vomiting, anxiety, or fatigue. At the end of the session, some therapists teach you how to perform self-hypnosis. 
   Ask your doctor or patient navigator to recommend one. If they do not have a referral for you, here is a link to find one: natboard.com/index_files/Page548.htm
Massage
   Massage is a hands-on therapy in which your therapist applies either a light or a deep level of touch and pressure. Breastcancer.org lists many benefits to massage therapy. For example, reduced nausea for chemotherapy patients, lowering anxiety, combatting depression, reduced fatigue, pain relief, and better immune function. In addition, stress is known to hinder wound healing. Since a massage reduces stress, it will, in turn, promote healing your surgery wounds.
   Some of the cautions you and your therapist need to be aware of are avoiding the area and markings for radiation and no deep massages. If you are having chemotherapy, ask your doctor before scheduling a massage. Also, of course, no lying on your stomach until your doctor says it’s OK. In addition, if you have had lymph nodes removed, there are special cautions. For example, the therapist should only use a light touch in and around the underarm area. If you have lymphedema, you should find a licensed or certified therapist trained in lymphatic drainage. A therapist that is not trained in that treatment should completely avoid the arm and underarm areas.
   Most major cancer centers recommend massage therapy as a complementary role in treating breast cancer. They can recommend licensed or certified massage therapists. According to the Institute for Integrative Healthcare, there is no evidence message therapy can cause cancer cells to spread around the body. So, treat yourself to a massage. 
Meditation or Relaxation Sessions
   Meditation is an ancient practice used by people all over the world. Unfortunately, many people think of meditation as something religious. When you hear the word, you may think of Buddhists. Meditation is about changing mindfulness, finding awareness and peace. There are many different types of meditation. You can find CDs for sale on the internet and free YouTube videos that teach you how to meditate. There are thousands of meditation videos, but not all of them are focused on breast cancer specifically. You can find some online videos that focus on breast cancer healing. Try it, and you will find, as other patients did, meditation reduces stress, helps lift your mood, and increases feelings of a positive outcome. There are lots of other benefits of meditation. For example, it also helps improve your sleep, controls your emotions, reduces fatigue, and relieves depression and anxiety.
Music Therapy
   Music therapy is another complementary treatment that can help you cope with cancer symptoms and side effects. At some large institutions, there are therapists that can design a program specifically for you. Plans can include live music, recorded music, singing, and playing an instrument. Its creative, non-verbal structure allows patients who don’t feel comfortable expressing their feelings to communicate in another way.
   Studies have found it helpful for relaxation, reducing anxiety, pain, and nausea. So, although it doesn’t help cure cancer, it does help you develop a sense of well-being and the ability to cope with cancer and your treatments.
Pet Therapy
   Mayo Clinic oncologist Dr. Edward Creagan says, “A pet is a medication without side effects that has so many benefits. I can’t always explain it myself, but for years now, I’ve seen how instances of having a pet are like an effective drug—it really does help people.” Pets, especially dogs, can help cancer patients improve their mood and relieve stress and anxiety. Just a wag of a tail or the feel of the fur can bring happiness and lift your spirit. Whether it is a therapy-trained dog or a pet, it can brighten your day and make dealing with your situation a little easier. 
   If you are home alone while receiving treatment, a pet can provide companionship and a distraction. Pets can also motivate patients to strive to get better. When you feel up to taking the dog for a walk, it can help you regain socialization and encourage communication with people you meet along your path. Therapy dogs are not just any dog. The dog and its owner must participate in a six-week program for certification. Some of the requirements are: the dog must be housebroken, non-aggressive, and not afraid of strangers. Next, the dog will be visiting different locations, so it must show that it is not afraid of loud or unusual noises, such as wheelchairs or elevators. Next, of course, the dog must have a good temperament. It can’t be a barker or one that jumps on people or bites. Finally, the dog must respond to basic commands like sit, stay, and lie down.
   Pet therapy isn’t for every patient because some people are allergic to pet dander and others are afraid of animals. If that does not apply to you, a pet or a visit from a therapy dog may be just what the doctor ordered.
Osteopathic Manipulative Therapy (OMT) or Osteopathic Manipulative Medicine (OMM)
   Osteopathic Manipulative Therapy or Osteopathic Manipulative Medicine is a hands-on treatment. It is helpful to complement and not to use instead of evidence-based treatments. The therapy is beneficial for pain management and the side effects of treatment and symptoms of cancer. You can Google OMT near me or OMM near me to find local offices that practice this form of medicine.
Physical or Occupational Therapy 
   Physical therapy and occupational therapy both help the patient adapt to their life after treatment. Let’s begin by describing the difference, and then we’ll talk about how each treatment can help you. The World Confederation for Physical Therapy defines what they do as “provide services that develop, maintain and restore people’s maximum movement and functional ability.” According to the Canadian Association of Occupational Therapists, occupational therapy is a “type of health care that helps solve the problems that interfere with a person’s ability to do things that are important to them.”
   Some patients say breast cancer surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation can make you feel like you have been hit by a big truck. Other people describe it as having the stuffing knocked out of you. You can also have limitations, such as lifting your arms over your head, pain from surgery areas, or brain fog. You can get relief from many pain, mobility, emotional, and psychological issues with one or both of these therapies.
   It is critical that a physical therapist teaches you exercises that will help improve your movement and functional ability as you don’t want to overdo it. You could injure yourself. Physical therapy can help restore sensation, regain steadiness, reduce fatigue, and reduce scar tissue tightness. Your therapist will create a baseline evaluation and then track your progress. They measure your range of motion and the re-education of your muscles.
   Your occupational therapist is not just for those who need help getting back to tasks they performed at a job outside the home. The therapist works with you to help you with many lifestyle adjustments. For example, they can help you adapt to caring for yourself and your children while you heal. They can help you make adjustments so you can continue to enjoy hobbies that you love. That alone will lift your spirit. With their help, you can adapt to your brain fog or improve your memory. They also have tips or hacks for conserving or improving your energy.
   Both therapies can help improve your quality of life. Check with your insurance company on the number of visits covered. If you do not have insurance, see the social worker or patient navigator to refer you to organizations offering financial assistance. You will also need to know any requirements for where or through which organization to arrange therapy. It is something you definitely want to do.
Qigong
   Qigong is an ancient Chinese healing therapy. The name roughly translates to mastery of your spirit or life force. Although there are many forms of Qigong, the type practiced by breast cancer patients is internal Qigong and includes breathing, meditation, and slow, gentle movements. It does NOT include the vigorous exercise of martial arts. Qigong has helped cancer patients with side effects, such as fatigue, pain management, and chemo brain. It has also raised their mood. There is a nice video introduction for breast cancer patients on YouTube. Here is the link: youtube.com/watch?v=m6kCXhYNBJo.
Reiki
   Reiki is a complementary therapy developed by Makio Usui in Japan. It’s pronounced ray-key and means universal energy in Japanese. A certified practitioner uses light touch or hand movement above the body to change and balance the energy fields in and around your body. The purpose is to improve your well-being on a physical, psychological, emotional, and spiritual level. A practitioner can give Reiki therapy in a hospital or at your home. In addition, its practitioners say they can send the energy remotely so you can have your treatment at home from a person in another location.
   Breast cancer patients say it’s beneficial as it helps them relax, especially when receiving chemotherapy. Reiki offers you several other benefits, including relieving emotional stress and tension, coping with difficult situations, and providing a sense of well-being. After you receive treatment, you may be thirsty so drink plenty of water. Also, avoid coffee and other drinks with caffeine, as they reduce the benefit of the treatment.
   Reiki doesn’t cure cancer, but it does help you cope with the side effects of traditional treatments. The only complaint from most patients is they want more time.
Tai Chi
   Tai Chi is another complementary therapy with its roots in China. It differs from Qigong as it was originally a form of martial arts. It is based on the theory that you have a vital energy, or a life force called chi flowing in your body. The goal of the therapy is to bring balance and prevent the flow of chi from being blocked. Patients who practice tai chi learn graceful movements and breathing techniques along with meditation.
   Even though it is considered a safe, low-impact physical activity, you should start slow and talk to your health care team before you begin. You can learn tai chi from books or videos on YouTube. We have been advised that it is best to get instruction from a qualified professional. This is because you want your body positioned correctly, and you don’t want to injure yourself. If you are not well enough to stand, your trainer can show you how to do tai chi in a chair or on your bed.
   Research from the National Institutes of Health and breastcancer.org states that tai chi helps increase balance, strength, flexibility, heart and lung function, and a sense of well-being. Some cancer centers and hospitals offer tai chi classes for breast cancer patients. Since it is not regulated in the United States, check with your insurance company if it is a covered therapy.
Yoga
   Yoga is a mental, physical, and spiritual practice that originated in India. Practitioners believe it unites the individual self with the universal consciousness. According to breastcancer.org, hatha yoga is the type most practiced in the United States. Health experts at the National Institutes of Health report studies show yoga improved breast cancer patients’ emotional well-being and quality of life. Practicing yoga also enhanced their confidence and reduced anxiety and depression. In addition, yoga uses multiple muscles together and builds functional strength. So, improving that functionality helps with everyday activities and increases the quality of life. Finally, it helps to maintain heart health. It’s critical because mortality from breast cancer continues to go down. Cardiovascular disease is the survivor’s number one cause of death.
   We have not covered all the complementary therapies. Still, we have included the ones found beneficial by reliable sources and testing. Our goal is to make sure the treatment may be helpful to you, and you are not wasting time or money. Check the content resource list at the back of the book for further information.
   Lesson: Complementary and integrative therapies can lessen the pain and help you manage the challenges of cancer and its treatment. 

Chapter 27: Dealing with Long-Term or Chronic Effects of Breast Cancer

   During our evening chats in our cabins at camp and in our daytime activities, we share our challenges of living with the long-term effects of breast cancer. We are grateful that early detection and new methods of treatment have continued to increase the survival rate. Yet, little is mentioned in the mainstream media about the 90% of survivors who suffer long-term effects of this disease. We work to help each other, find information and assistance, and raise awareness for the range of physical, emotional, mental, and social challenges.
   It isn’t easy to live with these effects, and the post-treatment care is not clearly defined, nor is the information readily available. For example, you may only see your oncologist or gynecologist once per year when you finish with breast cancer treatment. Part of the problem is that some long-term effects do not arise while you are under treatment, or they change throughout your journey. There is also a lack of awareness and communication between doctors and patients. So, patients hesitate to talk about the effects. At the same time, many in the medical community downplay the patient’s symptoms. 
   In this chapter, we hope to raise awareness and validate the reality and seriousness of the symptoms. Then, we’ll take each of the more common effects of breast cancer and discuss them one by one. 
We offer one note of caution before we proceed. Although this chapter contains the most significant side effects, it doesn’t mean you will suffer from all of them. Instead, it is a guide to help you if you have any of them. 
Concerns About Memory Loss and Cognitive Function (“Chemo brain”)
   Did you forget where you parked your car or left your keys? You may be feeling the effects of “chemo brain.” For many years, patients reported a mental fogginess that may include problems with memory, word retrieval, concentration, processing numbers, following instructions, multi-tasking, and setting priorities. Doctors dismissed them as a side effect of fatigue, anxiety, or depression due to their cancer. It was not acknowledged as a result of the chemotherapy. Finally, about twelve years ago, doctors recognized it as a direct result of chemotherapy. Both patient stories and research support the acknowledgment. There are now multiple books written on the subject.
   So, you are not losing your mind. The challenges are real, but the problem is not well understood. Researchers are still working to understand it and help patients that suffer from it.
   “Chemo brain” can make people unable to do everyday things like attending college, doing their job without mistakes at work, or engaging in social activities. Sometimes, it takes a lot of mental effort to do things they did on autopilot. Some people make mistakes like driving away from a store and leaving their partners behind. Maria left her dog at the community mailbox. Fortunately, she remembered when she arrived home, and the dog was still waiting when she returned to retrieve him. Some can't think of a word and substitute a totally wrong one for it. Recent magazine articles contained stories of people who did things like leaving food to burn on the stove while answering the phone. These are a few examples of the impact on the ability to multi-task normal activities.
   For most women, it only lasts a short time. Once the chemo is over, their brain begins to clear, and they return to normal activities. But, for some women, it lasts for a long time. Every patient is different. There doesn’t seem to be a way to predict who will experience it and to what degree. 
   Doctors aren’t sure of the exact cause. Here is what has been said may be the cause. Some doctors and researchers believe the neurons (brain cells that communicate with other brain cells) may be affected by some anticancer drugs. Most drugs do not penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Other researchers think that chemo causes some chemical or physical changes in the brain or both. Metabolic imaging studies report people exposed to chemotherapy have damaged brain function in certain regions compared to people who didn’t receive chemotherapy.
   Some experts attribute it to stress, anxiety, or depression. Of course, there are also women like Paulette. Her cancer spread to her brain and caused a variety of functional issues. Then there is Carol, whose brain fog was attributed to her pain medication.
   Finally, other medical conditions, such as diabetes, thyroid problems, and nutritional deficiency, can contribute to brain function issues.
So, what can you do if you experience memory or concentration problems that make it difficult to do your job or perform everyday tasks? We recommend telling your doctor as early as possible. She may refer you to an occupational therapist or a neuropsychologist. These specialists can help you adjust to new ways of doing things or doing something different. Unfortunately, some women have to find a new, less demanding job or a job that uses different strengths and skills. Many people have found that decaffeinated green tea and ginkgo biloba help improve memory/concentration. Again, your pharmacist or health care provider can discuss recommended amounts, risks, and drug interactions.
   Finally, some women cannot return to work and must file for disability. The nurse navigator or social worker where you receive treatment can help with finding and getting benefits.
Fatigue
   No, you are not imagining it. Fatigue is a common and distressing aftereffect of breast cancer treatment. As many as 9 out of 10 women suffer some degree of fatigue, and everyone experiences fatigue differently. You may feel extreme tiredness and exhaustion that doesn’t go away with rest or sleep. Many patients are so exhausted they lose interest in doing everyday things. Research has shown that it can be a persistent problem from six months to years after receiving the treatment. If you have had chemotherapy or radiation, it may be the cause. Also, hormonal therapy and immunotherapy can contribute to your feeling exhausted. We also spoke to women who experienced fatigue due to pain, nausea, infection, weight gain, hot flashes, and sleep issues. Although your body and emotions have been through a lot, you should begin to get your energy back as your treatment ends and you begin to heal. Your doctor may prescribe rest, a healthy diet, and some vitamins. 
   Here are some ideas to manage your fatigue:
* Track your fatigue in your daily journal. Then you can plan activities when you have the most energy. It can also help you describe how you feel and the level of your fatigue to your doctor.
* Stay hydrated. If you don’t drink enough fluids, you can become dehydrated, and that alone can make you feel tired.
* Rest after activities (Phyllis’ husband teased her that she needed a short nap after showering and curling her hair). Seriously, if you go to a doctor’s visit or go out to get necessities, take a little nap of twenty to thirty minutes. Just be careful not to sleep too long or late in the day as it can influence your nighttime sleep.
* Relaxing techniques, such as meditation or listening to relaxing music, are helpful to many people.
* If your friends or family offer to help, take it. Don’t think you have to be a super person and do everything you did before your diagnosis.
* You also may need to schedule an appointment with a counselor as anxiety, depression, and challenges in post-surgery changes can also lead to feelings of exhaustion. 
   If counseling and the health habits listed above don’t work, you need to talk to your doctor or find one who has worked with the long-term effects of breast cancer and its treatments. 

Headache
   Headaches are another common side effect you can experience with breast cancer. You may have any of the three types of headaches:
* A ‘tension headache’ usually feels like the pain wraps around your head like a band. It can be more intense in the front or the back of your head.
* A ‘sinus headache’ usually creates pain in your forehead, cheeks, and nasal area. You may also have a stuffy or runny nose.
* A ‘migraine headache’ in our mind is the worst type. In addition to pain, you might have nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound.
   The treatment you received or the medications you’re taking can cause headaches. You can also experience headaches as a withdrawal symptom when you stop taking pain medication. Don’t suffer from headaches; get help. You may be able to get relief with a change in the dosage of your prescriptions. Here are some things you can do to prevent the pain of your headaches:
* Talk to your doctor about integrating complementary therapies. 
* Get enough sleep. When you are exhausted and try to do things, you get stressed, leading to a tension headache.
* Eat regular healthy meals. If you skip a meal, it can bring on a headache and make you very cranky. 
* Avoid caffeine. Research has linked caffeine in coffee, chocolate, and soda to headaches.
* Stick to a routine. Changes in patterns, such as eating and sleeping times, can trigger a headache.
* Headaches are another reason to keep a journal during and after the treatment. It can help you identify what triggers your headaches and avoid those things. A journal also gives your doctor clues so he can treat your headaches.
   What can you do if you get a headache? 
* First, put a cool cloth or an ice pack on your forehead, temples, or the back of your neck. It does help.
* Take some of the over-the-counter medicines, such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Be sure to tell your doctor about what you are taking. Your doctor may prescribe something stronger, depending upon your treatment, pain level, and symptoms.
* Take a warm shower, a nap, or a short walk.
* Relax in a cool dark room and listen to some soothing music. For example, you can select easy-listening stations or meditative music on YouTube. Also, your digital assistant (for example, Google or Alexa) can find a nice selection for you.
Pain and Numbness (Peripheral Neuropathy)
   Peripheral neuropathy can be debilitating. Your nerves send messages between areas of the body and the spinal cord, and the brain. Peripheral neuropathy happens when the nerves are damaged, such as when multiple surgeries are performed in the same area. The nerves keep trying to send messages, but the pathway is blocked due to the damage. 
   Multiple surgeries are not the only cause of this pain and numbness. Chemotherapy, radiation, and medications can also cause it. In addition, some patients develop diabetes after the treatment, and that can be a cause. Some people suffer only mild symptoms that end when the treatment ends. For others, the pain, burning, and pins and needles make it impossible to sleep, work, or do everyday tasks. 
   Discuss your symptoms with your doctor immediately. She may prescribe medication to give you relief. She may also refer you to a pain clinic. 
   Here are some steps you can take to avoid injury and treat the pain. Not all may apply to you as they relate to the area in which you feel the pain.
* Wear shoes and slippers to avoid unknowingly injuring your feet. 
* Wear gloves and socks to keep your hands and feet warm and help prevent dryness. You can apply fragrance-free body lotion and wear mittens or gloves and socks to bed for a beauty treatment and relief of dry skin.
* Avoid hot water on the affected body part.
* When you are cooking, wear oven mittens or gloves to remove pans from the oven or range top. Oven mittens are a good safety measure, even if you don't experience pain and numbness.
* If you get dizzy or your balance is affected, keep your home well-lit and remove hazards like scatter rugs.
* If you experience numbness, check the affected area for injury and get help right away to avoid infection.
* Ask your doctor for a referral to a physical or occupational therapist. Many insurance companies cover the cost.
Cardiovascular Issues (Heart)
   Doctors are now finding a link between heart problems and cancer treatment. So, schedule a visit with an oncology cardiologist as part of your annual health checkups. Also, keep tabs on your lab results and medication through your patient portal.
   So, what is causing heart problems for many breast cancer patients? First, chemotherapy is effective because it kills cancer cells. But you should realize it also kills healthy cells like those in your heart and the rest of your cardiovascular system. As a result, it can cause pericarditis, an inflammation of the sac that surrounds your heart. Next, radiation treatment targeted to tumors in the chest can damage your heart muscle and damage the arteries that carry blood and oxygen to your heart. In addition, immunotherapies and hormone therapies can lead to heart problems. Finally, the treatment drugs you may take can affect your blood pressure, lipids, sugar processing control, and lifestyle changes.
   Today, doctors are more aware of the effects on your heart and other parts of your cardiovascular system. So, they can be more exacting in the area targeted and the therapies prescribed. Oncologists in major hospitals and cancer centers are now referring patients to cardiologists before cancer treatment. They are also recommending the following things you can do in addition to the basic good health recommendations to prevent heart disease.
* Eat a healthy diet. Plan more plant-based meals and cut out the fats, especially trans fats. Reduce sugar and salt intake. 
* The American Association recommends maintaining a healthy weight. Your BMI (Body Mass Index) should be between 18.5 and 24.9. Don’t reach for your calculator to do complicated math. Instead, you can go online to the NIH website and type in ‘BMI calculator.’ Then, just enter your height and weight, and the website will calculate it for you. Here is the link: https://bmi-calculator.io/nih-bmi-calculator
* Get regular checkups. You may need more than a yearly checkup so your doctor can look for early signs of diabetes, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol. They are early warning signs of cardiovascular disease. In addition, make sure your primary care doctor is aware of all of your cancer treatments and prescriptions.
* Take your prescriptions. Don’t skip them or take half doses to save money. They can keep things like high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and diabetes under control. If you can’t afford your prescriptions, many drug companies have programs to help with the cost. Also, there are drug store programs that save you money.
Dental Issues
   Scheduling a trip to the dentist may not be top of mind when you get diagnosed with breast cancer. It needs to be on your list of things to do before you start the treatment. That’s because many cancer treatments have side effects that affect your teeth, gums, mouth, and salivary glands. Also, you have bacteria in your mouth that can get into your bloodstream during cleanings and dental procedures. These bacteria can cause infections in other parts of your body. So, while not all cancer treatments can cause oral health issues, it is best to get a checkup at the dentist and talk to your doctor about any planned treatment side effects.
   Here are the possible side effects:
* Patients frequently complain of dry mouth. 
* Your saliva may decrease in volume or become thicker.
* Infection, including inflammation of the sac surrounding your heart (pericarditis).
* Mouth sores.
* Increased risk of tooth decay or loss 
* Increased risk of gum disease.
* Loss of taste.
* Risk of jaw disease or bone loss.
   Good oral hygiene is critical to lowering your risk of these side effects. In addition, your dentist may recommend special fluoride treatments during radiation or chemotherapy. Your doctor may also recommend jaw exercises to prevent or reduce jaw stiffness. 
   If you get a bone marrow or stem cell transplant, patients typically receive a high dose of chemotherapy. The chemo may cause any of the side effects mentioned above in this section. In addition, if you receive an ALLO bone marrow transplant, you may also develop a sensitivity to spicy or acidic food or difficulty swallowing.
   In addition to going to the dentist and keeping your doctor informed about any side effects, here are some things you can do to reduce these effects:
* Brush your teeth gently twice a day and use dental floss.
* Also, avoid alcohol and foods with extreme textures and flavors as they may irritate your mouth and gums.
* Reduce your sugar intake and eliminate sodas as bacteria feed on sugar, leading to tooth decay.
* Get outside for natural vitamin D. Eat dairy, eggs, and fish.
Bone Loss and Osteoporosis 
   We think of skeletons at Halloween and in scary movies, but what some treatments for breast cancer can do to your skeleton is not funny. As a natural part of the aging process, both men and women begin to experience loss in bone density around 35-years old. The loss is much more significant for women after they go through menopause. That is because their ovaries no longer produce the hormone estrogen. This hormone is significant because it protects against bone loss, fractures, and osteoporosis. 
   Some chemotherapies, hormone therapies, and ovarian suppression drugs cause loss of ovarian function and reduced estrogen levels. Suppose you haven’t gone through menopause before beginning cancer treatment. In that case, you may go through it earlier than women who didn’t have breast cancer. 
   Your doctor may prescribe Tamoxifen for you as a means of preventing recurrence or development of cancer in your opposite breast. Doctors also prescribe it if you are at high risk for breast cancer due to your family history or you have inherited mutated BRCA genes. In addition to lowering your risk of breast cancer or recurrence, Tamoxifen can prevent bone loss after you go through menopause, and it will lower your cholesterol.
   Owing to the risk of bone loss or osteoporosis, some medical providers recommend you get a bone density test (DEXA scan) before starting any chemo or hormone therapy. It’s a painless test that will provide a baseline and help your doctor recommend treatments to reduce the impact of your treatments. In addition to the basic American Medical Association healthy guidelines. Here are some things you can do to reduce your risk of bone loss, fracture, or osteoporosis:
* Weight-bearing and resistance exercises are best for building your bones. Some weight-bearing activities are walking, climbing stairs, and dancing. Lifting weights is a good resistance exercise. Physical therapists suggest starting slow and using light weights when you begin. (You can use two or three-pound weights or even a large can of soup). 
* Talk to your doctor about medication. Although there is no cure for osteoporosis, there are medications to prevent and treat it. Also, your doctor may prescribe calcium pills to make sure you are getting enough calcium. Look for calcium citrate pills with vitamin D. Endocrinologists we spoke to say calcium citrate is absorbed better than calcium carbonate. It also produces less gas, which can prevent embarrassing flatulence. 
* Scan your house for fall hazards that can result in fractures. For example, remove any clutter, scatter rugs, and stacks of magazines and newspapers. Family members or a friend can help you remove hazards and follow the other health recommendations.
Cataracts
   Suppose you have had chemotherapy for breast cancer. In that case, you may experience a side effect you may be unaware of unless you read a recent article in Cure magazine. The article author thought she was turning into a vampire. She had become sensitive to bright light, especially on sunny days. Unfortunately, her eyes were also getting cloudy at a fast pace. Many survivors first thought would be that cancer has returned, and it has gone to their brain or their eyes. A trip to the eye doctor can put your mind at ease about cancer. You may be surprised to learn that cataracts can develop as a side effect of chemotherapy. Usually, you think of cataracts as a condition that develops later in life. Still, they can develop at any age after breast cancer treatment. The author of the article was only 38-years old.
   Unfortunately, there is no medicine or eye drops to treat cataracts. So, surgery is the only option. Your eyes are precious. Even though you have been strong through your cancer treatment, it is a new fear. Your head would be spinning just like the article author’s head was. If you develop cataracts after chemotherapy, it affects both eyes. Therefore, you have to have eye surgery twice. You may think, “Oh, no! Not two more surgeries.” It is the only option because the surgeon operates on one eye at a time. You need the other eye to see while the eye operated on heals.
   Leanore, who is a breast cancer survivor, required cataract surgery. She said that the surgery was not as scary as she feared, especially after facing cancer twice. Her doctor assured her that cataract surgery was the safest and most effective surgery. Some people have this surgery with only something to numb the eye. While those who are squeamish about their eyes, like Leanore, have surgery with a light anesthetic. 
   Suppose you notice any of the following symptoms. In that case, you need to check with your eye doctor (ophthalmologist) and alert your oncologist and primary care physician.
* The lights are too bright and give off a glare/halo.
* Your vision is poor at night. 
* Your vision is cloudy. 
* You have double or multiple vision. 
* The colors seem faded.
* It is increasingly difficult to see things far away, and you need to get your prescription for your eyeglasses changed often.
   Below are a few things you can do to help prevent cataracts after chemotherapy:
* Drink less alcohol, as some studies show it is a contributor.
* Wear sunglasses that block ultraviolet B (UVB) rays whenever you are outside in the daylight.
* Wear a wide-brimmed hat, especially when you are at the beach or out on a bright sunny day.
* Get your eyes examined regularly by an ophthalmologist (they will check for cataracts and other eye problems).
* Manage other health conditions that can contribute to cataracts, such as diabetes.
Menopausal Symptoms
   There are several things to note about the relationship between breast cancer and menopause. First, we have read articles, spoken to doctors, and reviewed research. Those sources confirmed that women who go through menopause early are at greater risk for breast cancer. That fact is a good reason not to skip your annual checkup with your gynecologist. That said, this section focuses on the opposite relationship. Some breast cancer treatments cause women to go into menopause early.
   Treatments like chemotherapy, hormone (endocrine) therapy, and ovarian suppression (stopping your ovaries functioning either temporarily or permanently) can cause your body to experience menopause symptoms. In some cases, women as young as 35 years old can go into menopause. Many other women only experience symptoms, and their periods return after treatment ends. Their periods will not return if they are still on medication for five years after treatment
   In addition, when diagnosed, many women are taking hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to relieve the symptoms of menopause. If you are taking this type of medication, talk to your medical team. They will probably advise you to stop taking the prescription.
   Your symptoms may develop gradually, but for other women, symptoms start suddenly. Don’t be embarrassed and wait to seek help. Contact your doctor. Which doctor on your team you should call depends on your symptoms and discomfort. We suggest starting with either your gynecologist or oncologist. They can work with the other members of your team or refer you to a specialist. It is beneficial to use your journal to record and track your symptoms. 
   Below are some of the things you can do to help manage your symptoms.
Hot Flashes 
   Hot flashes are the sudden feeling of warmth in your upper body; it is typically most intense in your face, neck, and chest. Your skin might redden as if you’re blushing. It can also cause sweating, sometimes soaking your clothes. You may feel chilled after the hot flash ends. If you experience hot flashes:
* Try over the counter supplements like Black Cohosh, Vitamin D, or a combination of Vitamin E and Primrose are known to help
* In waking hours, dress in light layered clothes so you can remove a layer at a time when flushing starts. Start with a tank top, add a t-shirt or light blouse, and then top with a sweater (fabric depends on the weather in your area or room atmosphere). Wear loose-fitting clothing and avoid cotton as it absorbs and retains moisture. Instead, choose fabrics found in yoga or exercise clothing as they wick the moisture away. Pat suffered from daily hot flashes. So, she brought an extra set of clothes for work and activities. It was insurance as she did not want to be embarrassed by wet clothes clinging to her undergarments or revealing their outline.
* In the waking hours, keep a small electric or battery-operated fan handy. You can also keep a paper fan available.
* You can find cooling towels and wraps in the activewear department. They are designed for runners and gym enthusiasts.
* Carry a water spray to use on your face or wrists to cool you down. You will also need a small towel so you are not dripping wet.
* Always keep a bottle of water with you so that you stay hydrated.
* Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and spicy foods. They can all make you feel warm.
* There are some medications available to relieve the symptoms of hot flashes. Remember, you must check with your breast cancer team before taking any medication. It may have a negative effect on your cancer medication or treatment. In addition, other prescriptions can have side effects that would add to your discomfort.
Night Sweats
   Night sweats are hot flashes at night. To avoid night sweats: 
* Keep your room at a comfortable temperature. You may add a standing fan to lower the temperature and increase airflow. 
* At night wear a soft sleep shirt or lightweight pajamas. Also, use a silk pillowcase, a specially designed pillow that stays cool, or a cooling scarf at night. You can also find comfort with pajamas made of natural fibers like bamboo and other wicking fabrics.
* In addition, many of the above suggestions for hot flashes also apply to night sweats.
Insomnia
   If you have difficulty sleeping: 
* Go to bed and get up at the same time every day.
* Try winding down an hour before bedtime.
* Avoid the computer and TV an hour before bedtime. Some women find anti-glare blue light glasses helpful if they want to catch their favorite show before bedtime.
* Doctors often recommend over-the-counter Melatonin.
* Don’t go multiple nights without sleep; contact your team and let them know the impact.
Changes to Your Skin
   When estrogen decreases, so does collagen. As a result, your skin starts to sag. It can also become dry, flaky, and develop dark spots. In addition, hair may suddenly appear on your upper lip and chin. Acne breakouts are also a common symptom. If your skin is dry, flaky, or saggy:
* Wash off the makeup and dirt every day. If you choose a foaming cleanser, choose only one made for sensitive skin. Other foaming cleansers will dry your skin even more.
* Choose a moisturizer that contains hyaluronic acid. It will help hold in water and keep your skin flexible.
* If it fits in your budget, choose a serum or cream with antioxidants as it may help. For example, vitamin C is an antioxidant that fights off free radicals that contribute to aging skin.
   Don’t run to the drugstore for the acne cream teenagers use if you have an acne breakout. They are too harsh and end up drying your skin. Instead, try something with salicylic acid. If that doesn’t work, consult your doctor or dermatologist.
   Suppose you see dark spots appearing, especially on your face and hands. In that case, you can try the over-the-counter creams with your medical team’s permission. Unfortunately, women have told us that they haven’t had much success with them. Your doctor can refer you to a dermatologist who can prescribe a medication or give you an in-office facial peel or laser (IPL) treatment. Remember, you will need your cancer team’s approval for those remedies.
   If your skin feels like an army of ants are crawling all over it, you are not alone. It is another common menopause symptom caused by reduced estrogen levels. Since hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is not recommended for breast cancer patients under treatment, you can try antihistamines with your doctor’s permission. If it doesn’t work or is not an option, women have said they got relief with acupuncture.
   If you notice unwanted facial hair, you can use the usual tweezing, waxing, threading, and hair removal creams. The hair will grow back with all those methods. You can permanently remove the hair with laser treatment, but it only works on dark hair, not light hair.
Mood Swings
   If you or someone close to you notices changes in your mood, anxiety, or irritability, try some of the following suggestions: 
* Take a warm relaxing bath or shower.
* Identify and reduce or remove sources of stress.
* Exercise because it boosts your energy and reduces stress.
* Make sure you get enough rest and uninterrupted sleep. Lack of sleep can make you irritable, angry, or anxious.
* Keep your blood sugar at an even level by eating three small meals and small snacks during the day. Low blood sugar can make you tired and cranky. 
* Supplements like SAMe or St. John's Wart may help
* Consider the complementary treatments
Joint Pain
   Joint pain can affect your knees, shoulders, neck, elbows, or hands. It can also affect old injuries. As estrogen declines, the pain increases. In addition, it can cause menopause-related arthritis. If you experience joint pain: 
* Some over-the-counter creams and gels can give you pain relief. In addition, many people are finding relief using CBD tinctures and creams.
* If they aren’t helping you, talk to your primary care doctor and your oncologist. They will want to monitor you and possibly adjust your medications or give you a prescription to relieve the pain.
Pregnancy After Breast Cancer Treatment
   Suppose you are receiving chemotherapy or Tamoxifen to increase your survival. Then you need to talk with your doctor about the impact on your fertility and your ability to have children after treatment. Some types of chemotherapy and ovarian suppression can put you in menopause during treatment if you have not already experienced it. If you did not go through menopause before your treatment, your periods might return after it ends. If you want children, it will also mean that you will have a lower chance of pregnancy compared to the general population or survivors of other cancers. Studies also showed breast cancer survivors might have pregnancy complications, which means you may need closer monitoring.
   Suppose you do not need chemotherapy, are premenopausal, and had a hormone-positive tumor. In that case, the most commonly prescribed medication is Tamoxifen. Its purpose is to reduce the recurrence of breast cancer. In that situation, you should not get pregnant because doctors warn that it causes congenital disabilities. Doctors recommend using non-hormonal birth control, a diaphragm, or condoms while taking Tamoxifen and for two months after you stop. If you are newly diagnosed when your doctor prescribes Tamoxifen, you may take it for as long as ten years. That can have an impact on your long-term plan to have children. We recommend having a serious discussion about family planning and the side effects of treatment.
   There is another area that you may consider if you are interested in having children after your treatment. Fertility preservation involves harvesting your eggs and freezing them. It requires coordination between your cancer team and a fertility specialist. Timing is critical, and you must decide before your treatment begins. Usually, when women turn to fertility procedures, they are given medication to stimulate the ovaries to produce more eggs. Not all the usual drugs are safe for breast cancer patients. You may also choose to take a medication designed to protect your ovaries while taking both chemotherapy and Tamoxifen. So, this is why you need to make a decision quickly and coordinate your appointments. You may also consider the cost as insurance does not usually cover the cost of fertility preservation. 
   The good news is pregnancy after breast cancer does not lower your chance of survival. Of course, you will not be able to breastfeed after a double mastectomy. Nor can you with the affected breast after a lumpectomy. Breastfeeding may be possible with the unaffected breast.
Sexual Difficulties
   Unfortunately, many doctors focus on keeping you alive and killing cancer. Therefore, they don’t discuss changes you can expect, like side effects associated with your sex life. Some team members even play down the topic. Many patients say the quality of life is just as important as the quantity of life. At the same time, others are hesitant to be forceful in their request for help or are embarrassed to discuss this personal topic.
   Sexual difficulties are not uncommon in breast cancer patients and survivors. Surgery and treatments like chemo, radiation, and hormone suppression can affect your physical body, self-image, and sexuality. In addition, you can feel anxious and exhausted. Managing everything can be overwhelming. So, sex may not be something on your mind, especially at the beginning of your journey and during treatment. But, as you get a handle on things and begin to feel better, you want to regain intimacy to feel loved and supported. Sex is a way to experience intimacy, but it is not the only way. So, let’s talk about the side effects on your sex life and how to manage them. Then we’ll talk about other ways to express intimacy.
   We listed below the side effects women most commonly reported during and after breast cancer treatment and what you can do about them. Of course, your treatment and where you are in your journey will impact the side effects that you may experience and their seriousness.
1- Lower or Loss of Desire and Energy for Sex
   The lower or loss of desire can result from lower estrogen levels or fatigue caused by your treatment. The menopausal side effects can also lead to a lack of interest in sex. 
2- Pain During Penetration
   Pain can result from the thinning of the vagina due to your treatment or medication. Dryness in the vagina can also cause pain. It is usually a result of the lower level or lack of estrogen caused by your treatment or medication that suppresses the function of your ovaries.
3- Difficulty Reaching Climax
   Anxiety, depression, and your treatments can have a negative impact on your ability to have an orgasm. Even if you have an orgasm, it may be less intense, and you may have less satisfaction and enjoyment.
   Although many doctors dismiss side effects impacting your sex life, start with a doctor on your team as they may help with things like increasing your energy. They may also help with the projected time for ending treatment and some symptoms going away. Next, we suggest talking to the patient navigator for a referral to a counselor specializing in sex therapy.
   Don’t hesitate to talk with your partner about what you’re feeling. You can try lubricants for vaginal dryness. You may try different positions to eliminate pain. Remember, there are more ways to experience intimacy than sex. Truly connecting includes the four types of intimacy: 
1- Emotional Intimacy
   In this type of intimacy, you create a sense of closeness by showing empathy, respect, and communication. Keep it simple, especially when you say the things that are hard to say. Always think before you speak and keep the conversation positive.
2- Mental Intimacy 
   In this type of intimacy, you are on the same page mentally. You have great talks and bounce things off one another. Some say they know each other so well; they finish each other’s sentences.
3- Spiritual Intimacy
   This type of intimacy doesn’t necessarily mean you share the same religion. But that you share the same values or code of ethics. You can share what gives meaning to your life. 
4- Physical Intimacy 
   This type of intimacy does include sex. It also includes kissing, touching, hugging, holding, and similar physical expressions of love.
Weight Gain
   Weight gain is nothing new with breast cancer treatment and menopause. There are several reasons you gain weight with menopause brought on by breast cancer treatment. First, you may find it difficult to stay physically active during your treatment. You may also find it a challenge to eat a healthy diet. Then, the steroids that are prescribed along with the chemotherapy tend to make you gain weight. In addition, the ovaries are not producing estrogen. A decrease in estrogen causes a reduction in your muscle mass. Since your muscles burn more calories than fat, you need fewer calories to keep your pre-menopause body weight. Maintaining a healthy weight is key to avoiding other illnesses or side effects. So, what can you do?
* Exercise, even if you can only do low or moderate forms of exercise, like walking.
* Eat a healthy balanced diet with the correct number of calories. Your team nutritionist can help you plan meals that keep up your strength and help you manage your weight.
   Lesson: This was quite a list of long-term or chronic effects of breast cancer. You must be aware of all of the possibilities when you begin treatment. Having realistic expectations helps you manage the challenges. Check the facts with your medical team and ask questions about long-term and chronic effects.


Chapter 28: Lymphedema Early Warnings and Management 

   We often get questions about the pain and swelling that occurs after breast cancer surgery. So, let's talk about what causes it. Then we’ll give you some early warning signs. Finally, we will suggest some things to do to manage it.
   Infection is a concern after surgery, especially if you have had any of your lymph nodes removed. Your immune system is critical to your health because it is your body's defense against disease and infection. Your lymph system is part of that immune system. Your lymph nodes drain out the harmful waste that gets into your body. They also tell your immune system to respond and stop any infection. Unfortunately, when lymph nodes near a cancer site are removed, it interrupts lymph flow, and it can cause pain and swelling. It also makes it harder for your lymph system to deal with cuts and infection. In addition, it can lead to a condition called lymphedema. If many nodes are removed from your underarm area, you are at higher risk for it to occur.
   Lymphedema can happen any time after surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation to the lymph nodes. It can start as early as a few days or four to six weeks after surgery or radiation. It commonly occurs eighteen to twenty-four months after surgery or radiation. This is because your body not only heals on the surface where you see the scars but the fibers below the surface must also knit and heal. That healing can take as long as two years. 
   Patients we talked to noticed that they felt a change in sensation. They say it started as tingling or numbness in their arm for a day or two. But it went away. Then it reappeared, and they felt their rings, bracelets, and watches were tight, or they couldn't get them on anymore. Other women said they noticed achiness, discomfort, or warmth in their underarm, chest, breast, or arm. 
   If you notice any of these changes, it is critical to tell your doctor. It is your body's way of telling you something is wrong. Unfortunately, your doctor or physical therapist may not be experienced with lymphedema. In that case, they may not take your symptoms seriously or downplay them. Women say this is especially true if the symptoms appear mild at first. Remember, you know your body best. So, if you are experiencing symptoms, find someone who is trained in diagnosing and treating lymphedema. When you seek help early, a doctor can often use conservative treatments to prevent lymphedema from becoming a persistent, limiting condition.
   Every patient is different, so we checked with several doctors and breastcancer.org. They gave some more early signs to look for:
* You have feelings of fullness or heaviness in your hand, arm, chest, breast, or underarm.
* You have difficulty getting watches, rings, or bracelets on and off.
* You notice changes in your skin texture or appearance, such as tightness, redness, or hardening.
* Your shoulder, hand, or wrist feels tight or has less flexibility. 
* You feel "bursting" or "shooting" pain sensations or pins and needles.
* You feel elbow tenderness. 
* You experience slight puffiness or swelling in your arm, hand, chest, or breast. If you press your finger on the area, it makes a temporary indentation in your skin.
* Veins or tendons in your hand are harder to see, and/or your knuckles look less noticeable, or your once-wrinkled skin looks younger or smoother.
* You have trouble fitting your arm into a jacket or shirt sleeve that used to fit well before you began your treatment.
* Your bra feels tighter; it does not fit the same, or it leaves an indentation on your skin.
* You notice that the two sides of your back look different in size (asymmetrical).
* You develop a rash, itching, redness, pain, your skin feels warm. 
* You have a fever or flu-like symptoms.
   If you have any of these symptoms, even if they go away on their own, see your doctor. If you have swelling, it is telling you something is wrong. The longer you wait, the more likely the lymph will build up in your tissue. Once this happens, it can cause long-lasting damage. Also, the longer you wait, the more time and energy you will spend in treatment.
   If you don't have any swelling but have other symptoms, such as fever, extreme tiredness, or generally don't feel well, it could be a sign of infection. So, get to the doctor and have it checked out.
   As we mentioned, lymphedema typically happens gradually. So, if you have sudden and severe swelling, get to the doctor immediately. It could be many things. It could be an infection, a blood clot, or cancer that could reoccur and affect your lymph system.
   Unfortunately, the risk of lymphedema for breast cancer patients is lifelong. It can't be cured, but it can be managed. 
   So, what can you do? 
* Get educated about lymphedema and how you can reduce your risk.
* Although exercise is recommended, ease into it. Start with lower weights and fewer repetitions. In addition, doctors and physical therapists recommend wearing compression garments while you exercise.
* There are compression wraps and sleeves available online at a low cost. They come in natural, bright, and seasonal colors as well as patterns. There are even styles that appear to have tattoos. Here is one online source: compressionguru.com/lymphedema/arm#page=1
* You can have compression wraps and sleeves custom-made to fit your arm. Again, speak with your doctor or patient navigator to determine if it's needed for your case. 
* If you experience any swelling, elevate your arm to reduce the swelling. 
* Stretching and deep breathing will also help you reduce the swelling.
* Eat balanced, low sodium (salt) diet. Too much salt will cause you to retain water and swell. 
* Limit your time in the sun and always wear sunscreen.
* Avoid extremely hot water when washing dishes, taking a shower or bath. In addition, we found doctors recommend using antibacterial soap.
* Wear gloves when washing dishes, cleaning, and gardening.
* Never use a sauna or a hot tub.
* Avoid pet scratches and bites.
* During insect season, wear long sleeves and use repellant.
* Carry a small first aid kit with antibacterial skin sanitizer, antibiotic ointment, and bandages.
* Doctors recommend using an electric shaver to shave under your arms. If you use a razor with a blade, shave in front of a mirror, use shaving cream, and be careful not to nick your skin.
* If only one arm is affected, carry your handbag on your other shoulder. If you have had a double mastectomy, lighten your bag, and bring only what is necessary. 
* Get help to lift heavy boxes and packages.
* If you had the lymph nodes removed on only one side, get IVs and blood draws in the other arm. Also, remind the nurse when you get your blood pressure checked.
* Consider buying a medical alert bracelet to warn emergency personnel not to take your blood pressure or put needles in your affected arm. You may also want to add that information to the medical information application on your smartphone if you have one. 
* If you get a cut or burn, clean the area with antibacterial soap, use Neosporin or store brand antibiotic ointment, and cover it with a bandage.
* Doctors have found that a lymphatic massage will move the excess fluid away from the swollen area. In addition, it will make you feel more comfortable and can reduce the pain associated with swelling.
* Your doctor can prescribe a sequential pump to move the collection of fluid. Just check with your insurance company or Medicare regarding the requirements for coverage before you buy one.
   Lesson: Lymphedema is indeed a condition that can't be cured, but there are ways to improve or relieve your symptoms. It's critical to manage your lymphedema and its symptoms. Talk to your doctor or nurse navigator for strategies to handle your case. If your doctor is not familiar with diagnosis and treatment, find one trained to diagnose and treat this condition. Also, talk to your counselor to cope with the feelings associated with lymphedema.
Chapter 29: Patient’s Prescriptions for Their Doctor

Dear Doctor,
     Thank you for saving my life. You treated me like family – like I was your sister. You cried with me, laughed with me, and performed eight surgeries on me. Thank you!
 
Dear Doctor,
   I have cancer; I am not a leper. You can touch me with kindness, with your Heart, with a Gentle Hand. Just know that whatever you touch me with, I’m not contagious. The only thing I can pass on to you is the fear I feel when I am scared and the gratitude I feel when I am well.

   These are two entirely different prescriptions written by patients for their doctors. The prescriptions were the result of a project conducted at a Faces of Courage Women’s Camp. It was created by artist and hospice nurse Kathy Iwanowski of Kathy Iwanowski Studios’ Initiative. It began as an exhibit related to breast cancer patients and their feelings. The idea was for patients to write a prescription from their perspective about their care to the most important person who directed it – their doctor. Project creator Kathy said, “It was so powerful to see each woman write their ‘prescription’ about the good or bad care they felt they received during their cancer treatment. But it was even more powerful to see them all attached to a doctor’s lab coat; I think it made quite a visual impact on all of us when it was done.”
   The women really took time to think about what they wanted to write. They felt relieved to be able to say something symbolically to their doctor. One of the women remarked, “I have been wanting to say that for a long time. Now I feel I have gotten it off my chest.”
   The need to express their feeling is not unique. We were delighted to learn that the American Medical Association and medical trainers in universities like Columbia recognize the need. They are adopting methods to “acknowledge, absorb, interpret, and act on the stories and plights of others.” This practice is called narrative medicine. The stories captured in narrative medicine help bridge the gap in relationships, for example, relationships between doctor and patient, self, colleagues, and society. The prescriptions written by the patients for their doctor are a window into these connections. As this new expertise develops, it will improve communication, understanding, and the patient’s mind-body connection. You can read more about the narrative medicine and the impact on both doctor and patient at this Internet link: jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/194300
   Below, we share some prescriptions written by the campers. As you read them, think about the impact sharing them could have on the views and feelings of both the doctors and the patients. 
* When you tell a patient she has breast cancer, make sure you show some bedside manner and not treat the patient as if she’s contagious with your stand-off attitude.
* Thank you for being the doctor/woman you are. You give hope to a lot of women who would otherwise be lost. 
* I’m a cancer survivor for 4 years and 9 months. I can’t thank my God enough for my healing. I give him all the praise. I just had to say, “thank you, Lord.”
* For each patient that you treat, ensure that you show caring and concern. Answer anticipated questions. Speak to them on a level that they will understand. Have empathy. Be a continual learner, giver, and researcher!
* Keep doing what you are doing. During my treatment from beginning to end, the staff at the center treated me with kindness and dignity. This made me feel very special all the time. My experience was comforting and memorable.
* To: My Oncologist Doctors and Nurses.
Keep giving the wonderful, kind, and loving attention to all the patients that come through your doors, just as you did me!! 
* Make sure you appreciate the wonderful angels called nurses. God Bless my special angel. 
* Patients are also people. They are concerned about their health, and not all hypochondriacs, or just in to waste your time. 
* Dear Oncologist, I am not just another cancer patient – I am a woman, a human being fighting for my life. Please treat me like the important individual that I am. I LOOK TO YOU FOR LIFE!
* Do not inform your patients they have cancer via a telephone call.
* You make me feel like someone special. You humanize me with your compassion and patience. 
* Dear Doctor: Big Words - I am not Breast Cancer in Room 2. I have a name… Ask me sometime, M.E.
* The nurses are awesome! The doctors themselves made you feel like an object or paycheck. 
* Continue providing excellent care to your patients. 
* Be as understanding as you were to me with all your patients. You made this much easier than I thought it would be. YOU ARE THE BEST.
* Doctor, you are a blessing in disguise. Providing a loving & caring environment. Always making sure that one is comfortable and feels like a human being.
* Shorten the timeline between the diagnosis and the treatment. Also, treat your patient as an individual, not a statistic.
* Take numerous doses daily of treating me like an individual and explain my medical problems in good, old-fashioned English.
* My doctor who did the breast biopsy called me on the telephone while I was at work to tell me I had breast cancer. I was disappointed.
* An extra dosage of gentleness and thoughtfulness to be taken before speaking.
* When you are working with a patient that has two physicians, one in a cancer hospital and the other a primary care physician, please keep in contact with all physicians concerning this patient. Signed: The patient that got lost between the cracks for 3 months.
* I want to be on a medicine that I can take without getting sick.
* Always confirm with a second opinion. And pray before each operation.
* Don’t dismiss or write a person off because of what you might think! Be as positive as possible
* My experience with cancer has brought my family and me together. I thank God to this day that he has helped me through and only love and faith are the power of healing.
* You make me feel so good with every visit. I feel healed when I leave your office. I really appreciated the great job that you did on my surgery. I am happy to say that I have had no problems because of your expertise. 
* Thank you for your very caring and highly trained chemo nurses. They made the process more bearable.
* Continue to “Keep It Real.” Be direct, and don’t sugarcoat the information.
* Thank you for being such a motivator and caring doctor. Because of your tender touch, I’m still here to speak of your excellent bedside manners and attention given to your customers!
* Doctor, please return my calls when I need to speak to you.
* Please think of saving more lives instead of profit.
* You have been wonderful since the first time I went to see you after my diagnosis. I am thankful to have a dedicated doctor like you on my team. I thank God for working through you during this stressful time to save me.
* I appreciated my surgeon for appealing to my insurance company for additional days in the hospital. 
* I would love for you to keep your positive and friendly attitude. I love your patience and the care you have given me. Your staff is the best ever.
P.S. Because of your chemo nurses, my treatment was a breeze. I love them all.
* I thank you for medical care, but I really thank God for life.
* A pathology test should be done on “anything” removed from the body. So why isn’t this done? 
* I just want to thank you very much for saving my life.
Thank you. Through your hands, you allowed God to work. My cancer is gone.
* I was so scared when my sister was Dx 3 weeks after me. My doctor told me it’s not uncommon to feel guilty… my diagnosis probably saved my sister’s life.
* “Only what you do for Christ will last.” Thanks for being so caring, loving, tender, and patient during my radiation care! Continue to give of yourself and Be Blessed.
   Lesson: Sharing patient feelings and stories is essential to the mental and physical health of cancer patients. Visit the FacesofCourage.org web page to write your own prescription for your doctor(s).

Chapter 30: Left Out in the Cold
Phyllis’ Story

   Like many cancer survivors, I felt a range of emotions on the day of my last cancer treatment. I felt the grief for what I had lost. I felt like a warrior who no longer had a war. Although I had a great job and goals for my future, I also felt something was missing. Also, I felt strangely alone. As I began to write this book, I realized that I was not alone. Many cancer survivors experience these same emotions. When you have been in the battle for your life, you don’t return to life as it was before you were diagnosed with cancer. 
   For me, I needed a different sense of purpose. I felt that God had allowed me to survive for a reason. I needed to live my life with more meaning than my job provided. Yes, I loved my job, and it allowed me to have fantastic experiences, traveling and meeting people around the world. I wanted to do something for other people facing challenges like those I had encountered. At first, I shared my story and tips with people diagnosed with cancer who worked at Xerox or lived in my neighborhood. I was surprised and honored when people began recommending me as the person to call for emotional support and direction for information. Then I realized that my story could reach more people if I told it on television. So, I campaigned and succeeded in getting on the local station. 
   I moved several times for both personal reasons and my job. I always remained in contact with my Xerox “family” and my church in Sterling, Virginia, where I attended during my second, third, and fourth battles with cancer. When I moved to Pennsylvania just before the pandemic, I realized the skills from my job had helped me make a transition that so many survivors find difficult. I had always managed my cancer battles like I managed the projects at work. I kept records of dates, services, outcomes, providers, and questions to be answered. I had created a table with my dates of service, hospital, provider, and treatment. I also tracked my prescriptions and supplements. My list, which I called my ‘services list,’ detailed my vaccinations, scans, X-rays, MRIs, and lab tests. These documents were so valuable in each location. The latest group of providers were genuinely impressed and said everyone should have such records.
   That’s when I began my research and found that survivors are left out in the cold. Most providers said they thought people returned to life as normal when treatment was over, but that isn’t true! Your life is never the same as your old life. How is it different? It changes your perspective. The experience causes many people to look for a purpose. They may not be able to return to their old job, or they may have been let go when their weeks of disability pay ran out. Some are left with financial burdens, lose their job during treatment, or find themselves divorced. If you experience issues in your employment, check the Livestrong website and download the guidebook. Here is the link: livestrong.org/what-we-do/program/livestrong-guidebook. It has an excellent chapter on employment issues. 
   Most cancer patients worry, will cancer come back? Am I really free from cancer? Others want to show they won the war. Still, others want to give back or pay it forward. 
   There is no formal process or plan for the transition from patient to survivor. Also, there is a lack of communication between the cancer team and the general practitioner. As a result, most survivors do not know who they should see for follow-up, how often they should schedule a follow-up visit. They don’t know what to look for or what symptoms to report to whom 
   The National Collation for Cancer Survivorship has a great website with care planning tools for survivors. Care Planning for Cancer Survivors - NCCS - National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship (canceradvocacy.org) 
   They recommend a care plan with three parts: A Treatment Care Plan, A Treatment Summary, and a Follow-Up Survivorship Care Plan. They even provide forms on the site to print and fill in the blanks with your data. Good record keeping is helpful, especially when a doctor’s office asks you to update your records and gives you blank forms. You don’t want that big job of remembering every detail of every treatment. The site recommends visiting there as soon as you are diagnosed and begin your tracking. It will make your journey less frustrating and stressful and enable care that considers your specific needs or challenges.
   Lesson: Visit the NCCS website and start tracking your symptoms, treatment, and medication. Also, track your insurance and financial information. It will be invaluable for multiple purposes, for example, income tax time, battles with your insurance company, requests for grants or financial support, and many other situations.


Chapter 31: Your Treatment is Over – Now What?

   You’ve been looking forward to your last treatment. It may be your last chemotherapy session, your final radiation treatment, or your final visit with your doctor. At first, you are celebrating your cancer-free life. Then, in many cases, it hits you like someone threw a bucket of cold water on you. You feel confused, depressed, wondering what to look forward to now. Unfortunately, there is no playbook for life after cancer. Some people jump right back into their life hardly skipping a beat. But that is not true for everyone. As we found working thousands of survivors, everyone recovers on their own schedule. Remember, you are not the same person, and because of your experience, you know what it is like to fight for your life. You may experience many physical changes like chemo brain, new hair growth, implants, swelling in your arms, or numbness in your hands and feet. 
   Here are some helpful hints to get you on the path to feeling better and planning a new life. 
   Your body is not made of artificial ingredients. You need healthy nutrients to provide the building blocks to fight cancer and develop new healthy cells. So, eat a healthy diet. Take the advice of many doctors and diet counselors, eat like a caveman. Cut out processed foods, limit sugar intake, and eat different fruits, vegetables, and proteins. We say shop the perimeter of the grocery store, not the aisle. That’s where the fresh foods are found. If you can consult a nutritionist, take advantage of the opportunity. Together you can create meal plans that are not only healthy but include tastes that you’ll enjoy. A healthy diet can also get your metabolism and your weight back to normal.
   Although chemotherapy and radiation can leave you feeling worn out, it’s beneficial to start getting some exercise as soon as you are physically able. Your doctor and your body will tell you when and which activities you can begin. We know that exercise is good for you when you’re healthy. It is even more critical when you are recovering from cancer. Aerobic exercise can speed your recovery and help you digest and process your food. You can check with a trainer or go online to find your target heart rate to get the maximum benefit. You don’t have to join a gym. You can walk, jog, swim, or take a yoga class. In 2013, Livestrong®, a non-profit organization founded by cyclist Lance Armstrong, partnered with the YMCA to help survivors recover. Here’s the web address to check for their FREE program in your area: cdymca.org/programs/chronic-diseases/livestrong-at-the-ymca/. If you are not motivated by what we had to say, maybe these reasons to exercise will get you going: 
* It helps reduce tiredness
* It improves circulation
* It improves your emotional health and lifts your mood
* It builds stronger muscles
* It increases core strength
* It keeps your bones healthy
* It increases the number of calories you burn
   Next, reduce all areas of stress in your life. For example, limit the time you spend with negative people or eliminate them from your life if possible. Stop worrying about what other people think about you. It is none of your business what other people think about you.
   You can’t please everyone. So, focus on what you think and feel about yourself. Finally, schedule time to do things that make you happy. For example, plan a trip, explore something new, like learning a language, a new hobby, or take up painting or gardening.
   Your job can be another area that creates stress. If your job causes stress, look for a new one more suited to your style and talents, change careers, or work with a therapist to change how you deal with your job stress. You don’t have to have an expensive therapist. Some organizations offer their services free or at a low cost. For example, a friend has a therapist working with her free of charge as her therapist is doing research and has the grant to cover the cost. Your patient navigator or social services person at your treatment facility can help you find one in your area.
   You can not only be stressed, but you can also be depressed and confused when your treatment ends. So, keep a check on your emotional health. If you are down in the dumps for more than three days, don’t hide under the covers… do something about it. Make an appointment to see your doctor, find a therapist, or look for a support group. There is nothing to be embarrassed about. You have just been through a major trauma. Often cancer survivors show signs of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). No two people have the exact same life situation. So, you’ll recover in a time that fits your situation.
   Your treatment is over. Now it’s time to take control and get back on track with your regular and follow-up care. Set up appointments with your dentist, OB/GYN, and eye doctor. Make sure to schedule scans and exams that are recommended for your age group. Then, of course, you want to make follow-up appointments with your oncologist. Finally, don’t forget to get back to your hairdresser and maybe add something new to your wardrobe.
   Lesson: Take action and make a plan for your new life. Include healthy habits and eliminate unhealthy ones. Smile, laugh, dance and sing. Make the most of your life… start really living it.

Chapter 32: The Worry Skirt and Managing Your Fears

   According to breastcancer.org, psychologists found that fear of breast cancer is unlike any other fear. Fear comes in many forms and many stages. Even though the survival rate is now at 90%, women still worry about getting cancer. Fear begins even before women receive a diagnosis of cancer. Much of this worry is caused by misinformation, lack of information, and cultural practices and beliefs. In addition, there are other realistic fears. 
   Once diagnosed, the stages of worry are similar to the grief associated with other life traumas. At first, you don’t want it to be true. You can’t accept the diagnosis, and you deny its reality. Then anger sets in. You get angry at the doctor, the lab, the nurse, even your family. Next, some might ask, “Why did this happen to me?” or “What did I do to deserve this disease?” Other women put their heads in the sand like an ostrich and ignore it. But that is dangerous. Some women in this stage bargain with their higher power. It’s a natural reaction to vulnerability. Women typically offer to be more faithful, help the less fortunate, or quit a bad habit. When all of this doesn’t change the fact that you have cancer, you can feel resigned, helpless, and even depressed. You are not powerless, nor are you helpless. Today, there is more medical, emotional, and financial help available than ever before in history. Finally, you accept the diagnosis and become determined to give it everything you can in the fight of your life. It is then that you seek help from doctors, family, friends, and support organizations. They are all part of your army against the enemy, cancer.
   Cancer is unlike anything you have experienced before, so you feel a loss of control. Until you seek information, gain knowledge, and have a plan in place, you feel a sense of not knowing what to expect to happen next. There are no right or wrong to emotions. You feel what you feel, and it is natural to feel anxious or worried. There are many ways to deal with the feelings associated with cancer. We wanted to share one story that involves an activity to cope with cancer worries and then provide more information on dealing with your emotions. 
   Art can bring out stark truths that one might not speak of openly. So, Kathy Iwanowski of Kathy Iwanowski Studios’ Initiative created an art project to bring those thoughts to the surface and acknowledge them. The idea was to create a ‘no worries skirt.’ First, Kathy hung a skirt in the main meeting room and asked women in various stages of their cancer journey to write their fears on a piece of paper. Next, the women were asked to draw the international symbol for no (Ø) over the worry. Then they attached it to the ‘no worries skirt’ with a big safety pin. It was an emotional experience for the women to finally let out that fear and talk about dealing with it.
   Below we have listed the major categories of the patients’ worries in the order of the number of worries expressed. Then we list some of the fears expressed in those categories. After you read the fears and see if any relate to you, read the next section, which describes how to deal with your worries and suggests where to get help to cope with them.
1. Family and Community
* I won’t be able to see my grandchild
* I am deserting my husband and children 
* My parents will be sad
* I miss my dog, cat, friends
* My daughter won’t have me around when she gets married or has children
* My husband will find someone else to love
* I’ll pass it on to my family
2. Mental Health
* I’ll be depressed, angry, unhappy
* I feel trapped
* I’ve lost joy
* I feel anxious about the future
* I feel empty and isolated
* I blame myself and wonder what I did wrong
* I feel bitchy, and I am blaming others
3. Side Effects
* I feel pressured into decisions
* I am afraid of the pain
* I fear infection
* I’ll lose my hair
* I’ll be nauseous and unable to eat
* I’ll lose my eyesight
* Lose my testicles (yes, men get breast cancer too)
4. Death
* Cancer wins
* I won’t survive
* I’ll die in a hospital
* How long will I live?
* I’ll die like my mother, grandmother, or sister did
* There is no way out of this
* I’ll lose my friends
5. Accomplishments
* I won’t have done my greatest work yet
* I’ll never see Ireland (many other countries mentioned)
* I’ll never be able to get pregnant
* I woulda, shoulda, coulda
* I’ll never go to college
* I’ll miss my daughter’s wedding
* I’ll miss my kid’s college graduation
6. Hobbies
* I’m afraid I will only be a spectator
* I won’t be able to play tennis again
* I won’t be able to play the piano
* I won’t be able to do ballet or other dances
* I’ll miss out on things with friends
* I won’t be able to garden
* No art
7. Identity
* I won’t be able to handle it with dignity
* I will no longer be the mother, wife, sister, or daughter I used to be
* I’ll be too nervous to speak up for myself
* Loss of my power
* I’ll feel less of a woman
* I’ll be forgotten
* I’ll just become another statistic
8. Financial
* I’ll go bankrupt
* My insurance will be canceled
* I’ll get fired from my job
* I won’t have enough time, money, and energy
* I’ll get lots of bills
* I won’t be able to afford my care
* I don’t have insurance
Things You Can Do to Cope with Your Fears
   Survivors and counselors have shared with us their strategies for coping you’re your fears. You can use different techniques for different fears.
   Everyone agrees that the first thing you need to do is acknowledge your fear. Don’t be ashamed to have worries. You are facing a new situation for which you were not prepared. If you don’t have time for reflection, at least make a note. Then later, decide which of the other strategies you will use to deal with it.
   Next, talk to your team members, oncologist, surgeon, nurse, or patient/nurse navigator. The honest, valid information they can provide will help you understand what to expect and calm your fears. You can also talk with a counselor or a friend with a positive attitude. If you encounter friends or strangers who want to tell stories of struggling people or those with poor outcomes, stop them. Then say that you only want to hear positive stories with happy endings.
   Talking with other people facing the challenges of breast cancer can help you not feel alone. Your patient navigator, breastcancer.org, livestrong.org, and other similar organizations can put you in touch with people in similar circumstances.
   Use stress-reducing strategies like meditation, enjoying your favorite hobby, exercise, or physical activities like walking, tai chi, chi gong, or yoga.
   Don’t engage in stressful activities, especially when you are getting ready for surgery or receiving chemotherapy. 
   Keep a journal and reflect on each day. Then write down three things, no matter how small that you are grateful for.
   Make sure you get enough sleep. Try to go to bed at the same time and get up at the same time every day. Don’t feel guilty taking a nap if you feel tired. Sleep will help your body recover.
   You can also try any of the complementary therapies. 
   Lesson: Get information from qualified resources. Don’t waste today worrying about what might happen tomorrow. Instead, savor every good thing that happens.


Chapter 33: Thriving Through Sharing Your Story
Phyllis’ Story

   I have told stories in many forms throughout my life. I have even studied with expert storytellers. Nothing compares to the transformation I have seen in cancer patients who share their stories and their audience. I have taught storytelling classes for FacesofCourage.org and witnessed the struggle women have speaking out and sharing their stories with other campers. I also observed the healing power of their stories for both them and their listener.
   As a survivor, I understand the range of emotions you feel as you learn your diagnosis through your time under treatment. So, I recognize how difficult it is to begin to share your story with others. Sharing my story and hearing the stories of other cancer patients has made me realize my strengths, heal, and help others improve their well-being. It has given me a new purpose and a deeper appreciation for every new day.
   During and after treatment, it is important to do activities to improve your physical health. Along with your physical health, you need to take steps to improve your mental health. Counselors and patients agree that you have pent-up feelings and emotions right from the beginning of your journey. You worry about the impact of cancer and treatments on you, your family, and your friends. It is an unsettling time but expressing your emotions by sharing your story can help relieve your feelings of fear, stress, anxiety, and being alone.
   By improving your mental health, your physical health will also improve. When you share your story, you will feel connected and uplifted. When you feel better mentally, you will be encouraged to eat better, exercise, and get out of those pajamas. All these things are positive steps on the road to recovery.
   People often ask me, "How do I begin?" I tell them to start by writing for the trash can. Don't worry if your spelling or grammar is correct. Just get your facts and feelings down on paper. You can trash, reorganize, and correct later. The goal is to get those feelings out. When you begin to see on paper how far you have come, it will help you realize how strong and resilient you are. It also gives you the inner strength to stay strong during the challenges of your journey.
   Patients I have worked with said that seeing it on paper helped them change their priorities. They treasured the moments when they felt better and the time they spent with their family and friends. Although they recognized their job was important to their lives, it became less a priority than quality time spent with their loved ones.
   Many people saw their experience as an opportunity to possibly change careers and find a deeper purpose in their life. Lance Armstrong and Scott Hamilton are just a few celebrities who have shared their stories and found a new purpose in their lives. Other people discovered that recording their stories inspired creative works. For example, their stories were a springboard to founding new companies supplying products to improve cancer patients' well-being or make their journey less difficult. In addition, the stories and books people have written provide wisdom and inspiration for others facing similar challenges.
   Telling their story has helped people during treatment. In addition, it assisted people who have lots of bottled-up emotions when they were told they were now cancer-free to go and live their life. I struggled for a time with feelings associated with survivor guilt. Two of my friends lost their battle during the time I received treatment and survived. Sharing my story with both men and women facing cancer helped me find a new purpose.
   I receive several magazines dedicated to cancer research and education. They always contain inspirational stories of patients who are fighting or have survived cancer. They all say sharing their story has helped them, other patients, and caregivers. In addition, their stories give a deeper level of understanding of how cancer affects everyone around them. For example, check out the stories in Cure (curetoday.com) and Conquer (conquer-magazine.com). 
   Finally, I relate to Scott Hamilton, who referred to his survivorship as a blessing. It inspired me and enabled me to make every day count and work to make a difference in the lives of others.
   Lesson: Consider writing and sharing your story. It will help heal you both mentally and physically. It can also give hints, tips, and inspiration to others facing cancer and coping with their post-cancer feelings. You never know; it may lead to a whole new career.


Chapter 34: Create a Treasure Map to Your Future

   Most of us start the year with a list of hopes and dreams. Unfortunately, even the best resolutions frequently collapse come February. One rather delightful way of manifesting your dreams is to use treasure maps, otherwise known as vision boards. This simple, fun tool is a powerful self-transformation technique. Treasure mapping/vision boarding can help you focus your energy to create the life you really want. 
   It can help you focus on working toward and achieving a healthy, happy future. Perhaps you want a new job or start your own business. On the other hand, you may want to lose weight, start a family, or travel the world. It is not only helpful during recovery from cancer, but anytime in your life. Studies by modern psychologists found that just dreaming about what you want doesn’t make it happen. Instead, using a Treasure Map/Vision Board to focus on what you want can help you take the actions necessary to make it happen. 
   Basically, a treasure map is a large piece of paper covered with images that reflect a goal, your desired outcome, your ultimate dream. The idea is to give your subconscious a visual blueprint of what you want and help you focus your actions to make your dream a reality. So, a treasure map/vision board is an actual physical picture of your desired outcome. It is valuable because it forms an exceptionally clear, sharp image that focuses and attracts energy to your goal.
   In the 19th century, philosophers and writers advocated the belief that you are what you think. Similarly, treasure mapping teaches that our thoughts help create our reality. This theory is the basis of the video and book, The Secret. They all describe how your subconscious understands images and symbols much better than it understands words. It’s the reason why dreams often work in pictures, and symbols, or even puns. It’s also the reason why processes like art therapy can be so incredibly powerful and healing. By making a treasure map, you’re giving a clear message to your subconscious: I want this! Help me get it! Obediently, the subconscious will do its darndest to help you manifest whatever you want.
   There are many different ways of treasure mapping. Barbara Laporte, author of Goal of Achievement Through Treasure Mapping, recommends focusing on just one area or one issue at a time. She says that a single focus sends an absolutely clear message to the subconscious. Barbara also combines treasure mapping with positive visualization, affirmations, and expressions of gratitude.
   Other treasure mappers divide the paper into various areas to represent particular areas of your life that need change. Some like to use words and phrases alongside images or include positive affirmations on their maps. Of course, your images should always be positive, and many treasure mappers also believe they should always be in color. After that, it is up to you – find images that really speak to your soul; that make you go ‘Oh yes!’. You want pictures that give you a physical reaction like the chills.
Rules for Successful Treasure Mapping
1. To achieve anything in life, you must genuinely believe that you are capable and deserve to accomplish your goal.
2.  Don’t think it works like a genie in a bottle granting your wish. So be willing to work to achieve your goal.
3. Create your map using pictures and words that describe your goal.
4. Work at clearing your mind of everything that doesn’t support your goal. Work to rid yourself of negative thoughts.
5. Assess your strengths and weaknesses. Use your strengths to help you achieve milestones. Get support in areas where you are weak.
6. Learn to appreciate the current circumstances of your life. Instead of focusing on what is wrong in your life, be grateful for the parts of your life going right, however small they may be.
7. Affirm that you are moving toward your goal every day, whether or not outer circumstances seem to back up the affirmation. Use positive affirmations; for example, “I am getting healthier every day.” 
8. Express gratitude and be ready to receive all the blessings that appear in your life. Every night, before you sleep, think of three good things that happened during the day and be grateful. A study at Yale University found gratitude improves your mood and your well-being. It led to the most popular course at the University. 
How to Make a Treasure Map 
* Money is not a concern. Dream big!
* Get together a stack of old magazines – the broader the selection, the better. You can even include photos of happy vacations or events in your life.
* Browse through, cutting out any images that appeal to you. Try not to think about it too much. Don’t worry if they seem ridiculous, or impossible, or selfish. You could find yourself drawn to various images, such as people having fun, relaxing, playing with children, or animals. They might even be quite abstract in terms of colors or shapes. Next, put your pile of clippings aside for about a week.
* Then go through them and pull out those that are your absolute favorites. You will be putting them on a large sheet of paper or poster board, about three feet square. That will give you room for a good selection. Ensure that each one really gives you a tingle down your spine.
* Put the words “This or Something Better for All Concerned” at the top of your treasure map (vision board). You never know when something better is just around the corner.
* Stick those images onto the paper. You can also include a photograph of yourself and any phrases that ring true. Of course, poetry or quotations are fine too.
* Now put the ‘map’ where you will see it regularly, for example, opposite your desk or in the kitchen.
* If, at any time, an image doesn’t ring true, take it off.
   Lesson: Create a visual representation of your goals. Don’t expect magic. Work to achieve your goals. When you are focused, you see things you would have overlooked before. People will help you achieve your goal when you are clear about what you want. 


Where to Find Information and Assistance

   As of the publishing date, the resources below can assist you in finding information, support, and assistance. 
   American Academy of Dermatology
   P.O. Box 4014
   Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014
   888-462-DERM (888-462-3376)
   
American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors, and Therapists
   P.O. Box 5488
   Richmond, VA 23220-0488
   319-895-8407
   
   American Cancer Society
   3380 Chastain Meadows Pkwy NW 
Suite 200
Kennesaw, GA 30144
   800-227-2345
   
   American Dental Association
   211 E. Chicago Avenue
   Chicago, IL 60611-2678
   312-440-2500
   
   American Society of Plastic Surgeons
   444 E. Algonquin Road
   Arlington Heights, IL 60005
   888-0475-2784
   plasticsurgery.org
   
   Breast Cancer Wellness Magazine
   P.O. Box 1228
   Camdenton, MO 65020
   breastcancerwellness.org/
   
CANCERCARE (Counseling, support, education, financial assistance) 
275 Seventh Avenue
New York, NY10001
800813HOPE (800-813-4673)
   cancercare.org/
   
   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
   Women's Health and Cancer Rights Act
   7500 Security Blvd.
   Baltimore, MD 21244-1850
   877-267-2323
cms.gov/CCIIO/Programs-and-Initiatives/Other-Insurance-Protections/whcra_factsheet
   
   Cure Magazine
   MJH Life Sciences LLC.
   2 Clarke Drive Suite 100
   Cranbury, NJ 08512
   800-210-2873 (for free subscription)
curetoday.com/
   
   Dempsey Center
   29 Lowell Street
   Lewiston, ME 04240
   (877) 336-7287
   dempseycenter.org


Faces of Courage Foundation
10006 Cross Creek Blvd., 519
Tampa, FL 33647
   813 948-7479
   facesofcourage.org
   facebook.com/cancercamp 
   
   Flying Angels
   One International Plaza Suite 550
   Philadelphia, PA 19113
   877-265-1085
   Main Office: 610-228-4667
   info@flyingangels.com
   
   Harvard School of Public Health Department of Nutrition
   665 Huntington Avenue
   Boston, MA 02115
   617-432-1851
   haph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource
   
FDA (U.S Food & Drug Administration) mammogram information & help to find a certified site near you)
   10903 New Hampshire Ave
   Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
   1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
   fda.gov/consumers/womens-health-topics/mammography
   
Gilda’s Clubs
Cancer Support Community
5614 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.Suite 280
Washington, DC 20015
202-659-970
cancersupportcommunity.org/
   
   
   Lance Armstrong Foundation
   P.O. Box 161150
   Austin, TX 78716-1150
   512-236-8820
   www.livestrong.org
   
   LUNA (Hispanic support)
lunacancerfl.org/campamento-alegriacutea--camp-alegria.html
   
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center (NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center)
   12902 Magnolia Drive
   Tampa, FL 33612
   (813) 745-4673
   moffitt.org
   
   Nancy's List  (Great list of resources)
   nancyslist.org/
   
   National Cancer Institute
   9000 Rockville, Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20892
   800-4-Cancer (800-422-6237)
   cancer.gov
   
   National Cancer Institute Clinical Trials Registry
   4000 Rockville Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20892
   800-4-Cancer (800-422-6237)
   cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/search
   

National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine
P.O. Box 7923
   Gaithersburg, MD 20898
   888-644-6226
   nccam.nih.gov

National Institutes of Health
4000 Rockville Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20892
   301-496-4000
   nih.gov
   
   National Lymphedema Network
   411 Lafayette Street, 6th Floor
   New York, NY 10003
   800-541-3259
   lymphnet.org
   
   Patient Advocate Foundation
   421 Butler Farm Road
   Hampton, VA 23666
   (800) 532-5274
   patientadvocate.org/
   
   Sisters Network
   9668 Westheimer Rd., Ste. 200-132
   Houston, TX 77063 
   713.781.0255
   866.781.1808/toll-free
   sistersnetworkinc.org
   
   Susan G. Komen Foundation
   13770 Noel Road, Suite 801889
   Dallas, TX 75380
   1-877-465-6636 (Se habla español)
   komen.org
   
   Tampa Bay Community Cancer Collaborative
   Moffitt Cancer Center
   12902 Magnolia Drive, FOW-EDU
   Tampa, FL  33612-9497
   facebook.com/TampaBayCommunityCancerNetwork
   twitter.com/TBCCN 
   
   The Breast Cancer Foundation (The Lauder Foundation)
   654 Madison Ave. Suite 1209
   New York, NY 10021
   646-497-2600
   bcfcure.org


Sources and Further Reading

   Some sections do not list references as the authors and Faces of Courage campers are the sole source of the content. Other chapters contain book, interview, magazine, website references, and input from the authors and the campers.
Dedication
1. “What Is Sisu.” Sisu Definition - Sisu Group, Inc.., https://www.sisugroup.com/sisuis.htm. 

Section One - I've Been Diagnosed with Cancer, Now What?
Chapter 1 - What To Do When You Hear the Words "You Have Cancer."
1. Elizabeth Love. “Decisions About Treatment.” Dr. Susan Love's Breast Book: Fully Updated & Revised Fifth Edition, by Susan M. Love and Karen Lindsey, Sixth ed., Merloyd Lawrence, 2015, pp. 237–291. 
Chapter 2 - I Don't Have Time for Cancer
Chapter 3 - Get a Second Opinion
Chapter 4 - Assembling Your Team for Battle
1. "Assembling Your Care Team." Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know about Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image, by Carolyn M. Kaelin and Francesca Coltrera, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006, pp. 27–36. 
2. Link, John S., et al. The Breast Cancer Survival Manual: A Step-by-Step Guide for Women with Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer. St. Martin's Griffin, 2017. 
3. "Putting Together Your Team: Kt Starts with the Surgeon." New Generation Breast Cancer Book: An Optimist's Guide to Today's Diagnostic, SURGICAL, and... Treatment Options, by Elisa Port, Ballantine, 2015, pp. 59–62. 
4. "Assembling the Right Medical Team." Prevention the Ultimate Guide to Breast Cancer: Your Essential Resource from Diagnosis to Treatment and Beyond, by Mary L. Gemignani and Caren Goldman, Rodale Books, 2013, pp. 30–41. 
Chapter 5 - How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis With My Spouse/Partner? 
1. "Coping Emotionally." Straight Talk about Breast Cancer: From Diagnosis to Recovery, by Suzanne W. Braddock et al., Addicus Books, Inc., 2019, p. 43. 
2. "You and Your Partner." Breastcancer.org, 3 Feb. 2021, www.breastcancer.org/tips/intimacy/partner. 
Chapter 6 - How Do I Share My Cancer Diagnosis With My Children? 
1. "Coping Emotionally." Straight Talk about Breast Cancer: From Diagnosis to Recovery, by Suzanne W. Braddock et al., Addicus Books, Inc., 2019, pp. 44–45. 
2. Kahl, Kristie L. "Family Matters." Cure, Oct. 2020, pp. 41–41. 
3. "Talking to Your Family and Friends about Breast Cancer." Breastcancer.org, August 26, 2020, www.breastcancer.org/tips/telling_family. 


Chapter 7 - The Elephant in the Room 
2. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/understanding-a-breast-cancer-diagnosis/breast-cancer-survival-rates.html
Chapter 8 - Whisper No More. Learning to Say the C-Word 
Chapter 9 - The Cultural Impact on Screening and Treatment
3. Ashing-Giwa, Kimlin Tam, et al. "Understanding the Breast Cancer Experience of Women: A Qualitative Study of African American, Asian American, Latina, and Caucasian Cancer Survivors." Psycho-Oncology, U.S. National Library of Medicine, June 2004, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1618782/. 
4. "Breast Cancer May Be Cured If Diagnosed and Treated Early." Breast Cancer May Be Cured If Diagnosed And Treated Early: Choice Cancer Care: Board Certified Medical Oncologists, www.choicecancercare.com/blog/breast-cancer-may-be-cured-if-diagnosed-and-treated-early. 
5. Daher, M. "Cultural Beliefs and Values in Cancer Patients." Annals of Oncology, Elsevier, 7 Jan. 2020, www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0923753419388957. 
6. July 20, 2021, et al. "Cancer Control in American Indian and Alaska Native Populations." National Cancer Institute, April 25. 2015, www.cancer.gov/news-events/cancer-currents-blog/2018/american-indian-alaska-native-cancer-control. 
7. "Mobile Mammography UNIT." Spectrum Health, www.spectrumhealth.org/patient-care/cancer/screening-and-prevention/betty-ford-breast-care-services/mobile-mammography-unit. 


8. Padela, Aasim I, et al. "Religious Beliefs And Mammography Intention: Findings from a Qualitative Study of a Diverse Group of American Muslim Women." Psycho-Oncology, U.S. National Library of Medicine, Oct. 2016, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5539910. 
9. Person. "Fear Misconceptions about SCREENING Keep Many African-Americans from GETTING MAMMOGRAMS." Fear Misconceptions about Screening Keep Many African-Americans from Getting Mammograms - UChicago Medicine, UChicago Medicine, November 2, 2008, www.uchicagomedicine.org/forefront/news/fear-misconceptions-about-screening-keep-many-african-americans-from-getting-mammograms. 
Chapter 10 - When Am I a Survivor (It Starts at Diagnosis)
Chapter 11 - 50 Ways Friends and Family Can Help Cancer Patients
1. Bcnapinklady. "Helping a Friend or Colleague with Breast Cancer." Breast Cancer Network Australia, www.bcna.org.au/understanding-breast-cancer/talking-to-family-and-friends/helping-a-friend-or-colleague-with-breast-cancer/. 
2. "How to Be a Friend to Someone with Cancer." American Cancer Society, June 17, 2021, www.cancer.org/treatment/caregivers/how-to-be-a-friend-to-someone-with-cancer.html. 
3. Leitenberger, Adam. "How to Accept and Ask for Help When Living with Metastatic Breast Cancer." Breastcancer.org, December 1, 2020, www.breastcancer.org/symptoms/types/recur_metast/living_metast/ask-for-help. 
4. "Supporting a Friend Who Has Cancer." Cancer.Net, 2018, www.cancer.net/coping-with-cancer/talking-with-family-and-friends/supporting-friend-who-has-cancer. 
5. https://www.mdanderson.org/cancerwise/19-ways-to-help-someone-during-cancer-treatment.h00-159223356.html
6. https://www.cancer.net/coping-with-cancer/talking-with-family-and-friends/supporting-friend-who-has-cancer
Chapter 12 - Conversation Do's and Don'ts for Caregivers and Friends 
1. "Guidance on How to Talk to Cancer Patients & Survivors." Cancer Treatment Centers of America, April 2. 2021, www.cancercenter.com/community/for-caregivers/cancer-etiquette. 
2. Kosko, Katie. "Words Matter." Heal, 2020, pp. 12–13. 
3. Pine, Rebecca. "Nine Tips for Talking to Someone Dealing with Breast Cancer." Westmed, 29 Oct. 2019, www.westmedgroup.com/nine-tips-talking-someone-dealing-breast-cancer/. 

Section Two - Fighting the Battle and Moving Forward
Chapter 13 - Navigating the Financial Challenges of Breast Cancer 
1. "12 Years AFTER Diagnosis, Women Still Dealing with Financial Burden of Paying for Breast Cancer Care." Breastcancer.org, June 25, 2020, www.breastcancer.org/research-news/bc-causes-financial-burden-for-many. 
2. Kaelin, Carolyn M., and Francesca Coltrera. Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know About Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image. McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006. 
3. "Legal & Financial Impacts of Cancer." MD Anderson Cancer Center, www.mdanderson.org/patients-family/life-after-cancer/legal-financial-impacts.html. 
4. "We Can Help." Livestrong, July 23, 2021, www.Livestrong.org/WeCanHelp. 
5. McDowell, Sandy. "Financial Problems Can Affect Cancer Survivors for Years." American Cancer Society, American Cancer Society, December 5, 2019, www.cancer.org/latest-news/financial-problems-can-affect-cancer-survivors-for-years.html. 
6. Simon, Stacy. "Cancer Survivors Face Significant Financial Problems." American Cancer Society, American Cancer Society, January 28, 2019, www.cancer.org/latest-news/cancer-survivors-face-significant-financial-problems.html. 
Chapter 14 - Getting Ready for a Mastectomy
Chapter 15 - Understanding Chemotherapy & the Do's and Don'ts 
1. "Breast Cancer May Be Cured If Diagnosed and Treated Early." Breast Cancer May Be Cured If Diagnosed and Treated Early: Choice Cancer Care: Board Certified Medical Oncologists, www.choicecancercare.com/blog/breast-cancer-may-be-cured-if-diagnosed-and-treated-early. 
2. "Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer: What to Expect." Breastcancer.org, March 25. 2020, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/chemotherapy/process. 
3. “Cooling Caps May Help Reduce Hair Loss after Chemotherapy.” Cancer Treatment Centers of America, 11 June 2021, https://www.cancercenter.com/community/blog/2020/02/hair-loss-cooling-caps. 
4. Highleyman, Liz. “Managing Chemotherapy Side Effects.” Cancer Health, 7 Oct. 2021, https://www.cancerhealth.com/article/chemotherapy-side-effects. 
5. Lawerence, Leah. "Lifting the Fog on 'CHEMO BRAIN.'" Cure Today, August 2, 2018, www.curetoday.com/view/lifting-the-fog-on-chemo-brain. 
6. Moninger, Jeanette. "Understanding Heart Problems After Cancer Treatment." Heal, 2021, pp. 11–14. 
7. "What Is Chemo Brain?" Cedars, May 25, 2019, www.cedars-sinai.org/blog/chemo-brain.html. 
Chapter 16 - But You've Got to Eat
1. "Now Serving: A Healthy Approach to Eating." Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know about Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image, by Carolyn M. Kaelin and Francesca Coltrera, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006, pp. 267–287. 
Chapter 17 - Don't Forget to Laugh
1. Lough, Jessica. "Laughing in the Face of Death." Cure, Aug. 2020, p. 36. 
2. C, Christie W. Moore. "The Impact of Humor on Patients with Cancer." Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, U.S. National Library of Medicine, pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15853164/. 
3. Scott, Elizabeth. "How Laughter Can Relieve Stress and Help Your Immune System." Verywell Mind, April 24. 2020, www.verywellmind.com/the-stress-management-and-health-benefits-of-laughter-3145084. 
Chapter 18 - The Power of Positive Thinking
1. Fredrickson, Barbara. Positivity. Harmony Books, 2019. 
2. Santos, Laurie, Ph.D. “Well-Being Rewirement Challenge,” The Science of Well-Being. Yale University, 2, Aug. 2018, Coursera, Class Lecture
Chapter 19 - Learning to Ask for Help
1. Bcnapinklady. "Helping a Friend or Colleague with Breast Cancer." Breast Cancer Network Australia, www.bcna.org.au/understanding-breast-cancer/talking-to-family-and-friends/helping-a-friend-or-colleague-with-breast-cancer/. 
Chapter 20 - Take Baby Steps 
2. "Get Moving: Any Activity Is Better Than None." Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know about Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image, by Carolyn M. Kaelin and Francesca Coltrera, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006, pp. 243–257. 

Section Three Title: Surviving to Thriving
Chapter 21 - Facing the Mirror
Chapter 22 - On a Bad Day There Is Always Lipstick
1. "Cancer Treatments & Oral Health." National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, July 2018, www.nidcr.nih.gov/health-info/cancer-treatments. 
2. Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. "FDA Authority OVER COSMETICS: How Cosmetics Are NOT FDA-Approved." U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA, 8 Mar. 2021, www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetics-laws-regulations/fda-authority-over-cosmetics-how-cosmetics-are-not-fda-approved-are-fda-regulated. 
3. Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. "Using Cosmetics Safely." U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA, 24 Aug. 2020, www.fda.gov/cosmetics/resources-consumers-cosmetics/using-cosmetics-safely. 
4. Csanicz, Blanka. "How to Dress for Menopause: Combat Your Menopause Symptoms with the Right Clothes." Live Better With Menopause, 22 Sept. 2020, menopause.livebetterwith.com/blogs/stories-info/how-to-dress-for-menopause. 
5. "Dental and Oral Health." Cancer.Net, American Society of Clinical Oncology, 28 Feb. 2020, www.cancer.net/coping-with-cancer/physical-emotional-and-social-effects-cancer/managing-physical-side-effects/dental-and-oral-health. 
6. Heller, Diane. "Diane Heller." Diane Heller - Makeup Artist | Film & TV, Fashion, Special Effects, dianehellermakeup.com/. 
7. Holzer, Marissa. "Flat-Out Determined." Cure, Oct. 2020, pp. 44–44. 
8. "Keeping Your Spunk during Breast Cancer Treatment." Premier Health, 8 Jan. 2017, www.premierhealth.com/your-health/articles/women-wisdom-wellness-/keeping-your-spunk-during-breast-cancer-treatment. 
9. "Makeup Is the Best Medicine." Pretty Sick: The Beauty Guide for Women with Cancer, by Caitlin M. Kiernan, Grand Central Life & Style, 2017, pp. 171–196. 
10. Migala, Jessica. "How to Keep Looking-and Feeling-like Yourself during Chemotherapy." Oprah Daily, 26 Mar. 2021, www.oprahdaily.com/life/health/a28972142/chemotherapy-beauty-routine/. 
11. Migala, Jessica. "How to Keep Looking-and Feeling-like Yourself during Chemotherapy." Oprah Daily, 26 Mar. 2021, www.oprahdaily.com/life/health/a28972142/chemotherapy-beauty-routine/. 
12. "Prosthetics: An Alternative to Reconstruction." Breastcancer.org, 7 Mar. 2019, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/surgery/reconstruction/prosthetics. 
13. "Prosthetics: An Alternative to Reconstruction." Breastcancer.org, 7 Mar. 2019, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/surgery/reconstruction/prosthetics. 
14. "Skin, Nail, Hair Care during Cancer Treatment." Cleveland Clinic, 9 Oct. 2018, my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/17988-cancer-treatment-skin-hair-and-nail-care-during-and-after-treatment. 
15. "Skincare and Makeup Tips during Cancer Treatment." War On Cancer, 1 Feb. 2021, waroncancer.com/news/skincare-and-makeup-tips-during-cancer-treatment/. 
16. "Virtual Workshops." Look Good Feel Better, 2019, lookgoodfeelbetter.org/virtual-workshops/. 
Chapter 23 - It's All About Your Hair
1. “Cooling Caps May Help Reduce Hair Loss after Chemotherapy.” Cancer Treatment Centers of America, 11 June 2021, https://www.cancercenter.com/community/blog/2020/02/hair-loss-cooling-caps. 
2. Mikolaitis, Phyllis. "McKenna, Kelly -Hair Care When in Cancer Treatment." 5 May 2021. 
3. Uscher, Jen. “Cold Caps, Scalp Cooling to Prevent Hair Loss from Chemotherapy.” Breastcancer.org, 24 May 2021, https://www.breastcancer.org/treatment/side_effects/hair-loss/cold-caps-scalp-cooling. 
Chapter 24 - Wig Out 
Chapter 25 - Did Your Caregiver Turn Into a Vulture?? 
Chapter 26 - Complementary & Integrative Medicine
1. Eldridge, Lynne. "How Pet Therapy Helps Cancer Patients." Verywell Health, 30 Nov. 2019, www.verywellhealth.com/pet-therapy-for-cancer-2248910. 
2. Anthony, Kiara. "What Is Eft Tapping? 5-Step Technique for Anxiety Relief." Healthline, Healthline Media, 18 Sept. 2018, www.healthline.com/health/eft-tapping. 
3. "How Drum Therapy Can Benefit Recovery." Ashley Addiction Treatment, 21 Feb. 2020, www.ashleytreatment.org/how-drum-therapy-can-benefit-recovery. 
4. “Hypnosis.” Breastcancer.org, 19 Sept. 2018, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/comp_med/types/hypnosis. 
5. Integrative Nutrition. "What Does a Health Coach Do?" Institute for Integrative Nutrition, Integrative Nutrition, 29 Jan. 2021, www.integrativenutrition.com/blog/what-does-a-health-coach-do. 
6. Montgomery, Guy H, et al. "Hypnosis for Cancer Care: Over 200 Years Young." CA: a Cancer Journal for Clinicians, U.S. National Library of Medicine, Jan. 2013, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3755455. 
7. Muller, Robert T. "The Heart Is a Drum Machine: Drumming as Therapy." Psychology Today, Sussex Publishers, 22 Jan. 2015, www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/talking-about-trauma/201501/the-heart-is-drum-machine-drumming-therapy. 

8. Mustian, Karen M, et al. "Tai Chi Chuan for Breast Cancer Survivors." Medicine and Sport Science, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2008, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3927648. 
9. "Penn Medicine News." Pennmedicine.org, 6 Jan. 2014, www.pennmedicine.org/news/internal-newsletters/hupdate/2014/january/reiki-a-light-touch-that-helps-cancer-patien. 
10. "Physical Therapy vs. Occupational Therapy: What's the Difference?" Canadian Breast Cancer Network, 17 Sept. 2019, cbcn.ca/en/blog/our-stories/physical-therapies. 
11. "Reiki." Reiki | Complementary and Alternative Therapy | Cancer Research UK, 22 Jan. 2019, www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancer-in-general/treatment/complementary-alternative-therapies/individual-therapies/reiki. 
12. Seladi-Schulman, Jill. “Healthline.” 11 Mar. 2020. 
13. “Tai Chi.” Breastcancer.org, 19 Sept. 2018, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/comp_med/types/tai_chi
14. Team, GoodTherapy Editor. "Emotional Freedom Technique." GoodTherapy, GoodTherapy, 10 Oct. 2018, www.goodtherapy.org/learn-about-therapy/types/emotional-freedom-technique. 
15. "VNA Introduces Music Therapy Program: Vna Home Care and Hospice." VNA Private Care, Home Health and Hospice, 7 May 2015, www.vnatc.com/vna-introduces-music-therapy-program. 
16. "What Is Yoga? - Definition from Yogapedia." Yogapedia.com, 23 Apr. 2020, www.yogapedia.com/definition/4/yoga. 
17. Whittington, Elizabeth. "Qi Gong May Improve Quality of Life in Breast Cancer Patients." Cure Today, Cure Today, 5 Dec. 2020, www.curetoday.com/view/qi-gong-may-improve-quality-of-life-in-breast-cancer-patients. 
18. "Yoga." Breastcancer.org, 5 May 2020, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/comp_med/types/yoga. 
Chapter 27 - Dealing with Long Term or Chronic Effects of Cancer
1. Dobkowski, Darlene. “Developing Diabetes, High Blood Pressure or Heart Disease after Breast Cancer May Increase Risk for Death.” Cure Today, Cure Today, 17 May 2021, www.curetoday.com/view/developing-diabetes-high-blood-pressure-or-heart-disease-after-breast-cancer-may-increase-risk-for-death. 
2. 26, Mary Grace Garis?Updated July. “There Are 4 Types of Intimacy, and Only 1 Includes Touching.” Well+Good, 26 July 2021, www.wellandgood.com/types-of-intimacy/. 
3. “Blocking Cancer with Chemotherapy, Hormonal Therapy, and More.” Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know about Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image, by Carolyn M. Kaelin and Francesca Coltrera, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006, pp. 112–115. 
4. Boughton, Barbara. “Watch for Ocular Effects of Breast Cancer Drugs.” American Academy of Ophthalmology, 5 May 2016, www.aao.org/eyenet/article/watch-ocular-effects-of-breast-cancer-drugs. 
5. Chadwick, Dara. “Making Sense of Chemo Brain.” Heal, 2020, pp. 19–22. 
6. “Chemo, Medication, and All the Options.” The New Generation Breast Cancer Book: How to Navigate Your Diagnosis and Treatment Options--and Remain Optimistic--in an Age of Information Overload, by Elisa Port, Ballantine Books, 2015, pp. 146–150. 


7. “Cognitive Impairment (Chemo Brain).” Breast Cancer Now, 20 Sept. 2019, breastcancernow.org/information-support/facing-breast-cancer/going-through-breast-cancer-treatment/side-effects/side-effects-chemotherapy/cognitive-impairment-chemo-brain. 
8. “Fatigue.” Cancer.Net, 10 Dec. 2020, www.cancer.net/coping-with-cancer/physical-emotional-and-social-effects-cancer/managing-physical-side-effects/fatigue. 
9. “Fatigue: A Side Effect of Treatment.” Breastcancer.org, 9 Sept. 2021, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/side_effects/fatigue. 
10. Fenichel, Marilyn. “Bone-Building Blueprint.” Heal, 2020, pp. 15–16. 
11. Grey, Heather. “10 Years After Breast Cancer Diagnosis, Heart Disease Is Top Danger.” Healthline, Healthline Media, 16 Dec. 2019, www.healthline.com/health-news/study-finds-after-surviving-breast-cancer-patients-should-take-care-of-their-heart. 
12. “Handling Menopause.” Living through Breast Cancer: What a Harvard Doctor and Survivor Wants You to Know about Getting the Best Care While Preserving Your Self-Image, by Carolyn M. Kaelin and Francesca Coltrera, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2006, pp. 305–320. 
13. “Headaches: A Side Effect of Treatment.” Breastcancer.org, 18 Dec. 2020, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/side_effects/headaches. 
14. Henderson, Fiona Me, et al. “'A New Normal with Chemobrain': Experiences of the Impact of Chemotherapy-Related Cognitive Deficits in Long-Term Breast Cancer Survivors.” Health Psychology Open, SAGE Publications, 5 Mar. 2019, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6405778/. 
15. Latour, Kathy. “Facing Fears of Long-Term and Late Effects.” Heal, 2020, p. 21. 
16. “Life After Treatment.” Pretty Sick: The Beauty Guide for Women with Cancer, by Caitlin M. Kiernan, Grand Central Life & Style, 2017, pp. 228–237. 
17. “Menopausal Symptoms and Breast Cancer.” Breast Cancer Now, 31 Mar. 2021, breastcancernow.org/information-support/facing-breast-cancer/going-through-treatment-breast-cancer/side-effects/menopausal-symptoms-after-treatment. 
18. “Menopause: A Side Effect of Treatment.” Breastcancer.org, 23 Apr. 2019, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/side_effects/menopause. 
19. “Moving On.” Prevention the Ultimate Guide to Breast Cancer: Your Essential Resource from Diagnosis to Treatment and Beyond, by Mary L. Gemignani and Caren Goldman, Rodale Books, 2013, pp. 326–327. 
20. “Post-Operative Activity Guidelines and Exercises.” Www.brighamandwomens.org, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 18 Oct. 2016, www.brighamandwomens.org/assets/bwh/surgery/pdfs/surgical-oncology/post-op-activities-10-18-16.pdf. 
21. Stewart, Dana. “Cancer and Cataracts.” Cure Today, Cure Today, 5 Dec. 2020, www.curetoday.com/view/cancer-and-cataracts. 
22. “What Is Chemo Brain?” Cedars, 25 May 2019, www.cedars-sinai.org/blog/chemo-brain.html. 
23. Wysong, Pippa. “Out of the Haze of Chemo Brain.” Cure Today, Cure Today, 5 Dec. 2020, www.curetoday.com/view/out-of-the-haze-of-chemo-brain. 


Chapter 28 - Lymphedema Early Warnings and Management
1. Aliu, Oluseyi. “Lymphedema: What Are Your Surgical Options?” Johns Hopkins Medicine, www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/treatment-tests-and-therapies/lymphedema-what-are-your-surgical-options. Sourced July 26, 2021
2. Ashforth, Karen. “Identifying Fibrosis in Every Stage of Lymphedema.” Lymphatic Education & Research Network, 1 May 2019, lymphaticnetwork.org/news-events/identifying-fibrosis-in-every-stage-of-lymphedema. 
3. “Breast Cancer: Lymphedema After Treatment.” Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2021, www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/breast-cancer/breast-cancer-lymphedema-after-treatment. 
4. “Lymphedema: Symptoms, Prevention, and More.” Breastcancer.org, 5 Aug. 2020, www.breastcancer.org/treatment/lymphedema. 
5. Mehara, Babak. “Patient Education: Lymphedema after Cancer Surgery (Beyond the Basics) Babak.” Uptodate, 22 July 2021, www.uptodate.com/contents/lymphedema-after-cancer-surgery-beyond-the-basics. 
Chapter 29 - Patient's Prescriptions for Their Doctor 
Chapter 30 - Left Out in the Cold 
1. “Moving On.” Prevention the Ultimate Guide to Breast Cancer: Your Essential Resource from Diagnosis to Treatment and Beyond, by Mary L. Gemignani and Caren Goldman, Rodale Books, 2013, pp. 332–342. 
2. Tako, Barbara. “Alone with Cancer after Treatment Ends.” Cure Today, Cure Today, 5 Dec. 2020, www.curetoday.com/view/alone-with-cancer-after-treatment-ends. 
Chapter 31 - Your Treatment is Over – Now What? 
Chapter 32 - The Worry Skirt and Managing Your Fears 
Chapter 33 - Thriving Through Sharing Your Story
1. “From Silence to Testimony.” Writing as a Way of Healing: How Telling Our Stories Transforms Our Lives, by Louise De_Salvo, Beacon Press, 2000, pp. 206–216. 
2. Hamilton, Scott. “Make It Count.” Heal, 2020, pp. 12–13. 
3. Johnson, Kim. “Sharing One's Cancer Story Can Have a Great Impact.” Heal, 2021, pp. 23–23. 
Chapter 34 - Creating a Treasure Map to Your Future 
1. Laporte, Barbara. Goal Achievement through Treasure Mapping: A Guide to Personal and Professional Fulfillment. HeartLifter Publications, 2005. 
2. Mikolaitis, Phyllis L. “Creating Vision Boards for Success- John Assaraf.” 10 July 2012. 


xi




75


